
11072CH12





MoST of us find it difficult to begin writing. We can make this easier by thinking about the topic either through brainstormin that is with several people in a group giving their ideas as the
strike them, or by putting them down on a sheet of paper they occur to us.	f> ?
For	example, if the topic is 'Hobbies', we can draw write 'hobbies' in it:	===== ""	G.'-;•

Then we can put d		ough they come to us in a random manner as	belor(Z,


?(r\ M·


Outlet for energy




 General knowledge


Educa
0
endship

Creativity


Personality development




Choice


Relief from monotony

Music





ESSAY-WRITING	89

Having done that we select the points and expand each into a sentence.
1. Hobbies are free-time activities. Examples are stamp- collecting, painting etc.
2. They are matters of personal choice, not forced.
3. They are interesting and give pleasure.
4. They refresh the mind by providing an opportunity to do different kinds of activities.
5. They provide relief from monotony.
6. They help us channelise our energy.
7. They can also be useful activities and can provide pleasu to others. For example, reading out to visually imp · people, visiting art exhibitions, music concerts
8. Hobbies are educative and ey widen or neral
knowledge.	""	•	.J
9. They  help  us  develop  ourersonal
10T.hey serve as a mediu4v ;res our creativity.
11. We meet interesting,ro rough.rr	mon interests and develop fri n s
We usually begin a	·	ith a ctn,	or short description. We could begin thus:			./ 'C-/
Hobbies aQvities that w gage in,inourfree time. We may ereste	needlework, drawing and painting or musi . • lliilloeommon hobbies are stamp­ collecting, clay-mo 11' g, solving crossword puzzles.
   Although h ies so entail work they are taken upon through o e'  o   personal choice. They are not forced
       e activities that we are really interested nee ive us a great deal of pleasure.
.- ...-._. make life interesting. They refresh our minds rd day's work. We need to do something different to do our routine work effectively. Hobbies provide
t ·  variety.
   Hobbies relieve us from the monotony of daily life. They fill us with enthusiasm for work and keep our energy levels high. We will go to any extent to get the things that we require, to get the utmost joy from our hobbies.

90	HORNBILL

   Hobbies are also useful activities. Quite a few hobbies, like stamp-collecting, widen our general knowledge about various countries of the world. When we share common interests we even get into correspondence with people of other countries.

This is how we write an essay.
A composition on a particular subject consisting of more than one paragraph is an essay. The characteristics of a good essay are:
Unity	The essay should deal with themain subject, a all parts of it should be clearly linked with L.V subject.
Coherence:  There should be a logical sequence of th	is requires a logical r tionship bet  J,.. deas, sentences and par  r  s.

Relevance :	Unimportant,-?	·
Ge

included.

it carefully.	? ;('
e I parta	Games
1. "The Battl	terloo tf'O won on the playing fields of Eton." These wor  v buted tothDeuke of Wellington. Certainly one doe o play games in order to win battles; neither does cur culum include them for that reason. But the im r nee of games in life should not be underesti1"t  or without them it is harder for a person to be so indy anmdind.
2. For on   i g, if a person is to fulfil all the duties that society
exp		im, it is important for him to keep healthy. He l"-Jery intelligent, but that has little meaning if he cannot use of his intelligence, because he is always suffering bad health. In some ways, the human body is like a
machine. If it is not made use of, it starts to work badly. People who are not fit grow weak and become more susceptible to disease. Any form of game is useful, provided it gives the body an opportunity to take regular physical exercise.






ESSAY-WRITING	91

3. Secondly, playing- andtherefore experiencing winning and losing - encourages the spirit of sportsmanship, thus enabling one to deal with life's problems in a wise and natural manner. Games teach the truth embodied in the Olympic motto: 'The important thing in playing is not the winning or the losing, but the participation' - and, I may add, doing the best onecan.
4. We have to remember some other things about playing games, however. First, it is the physical exercise that is important for health, not the games themselves, and there are other ways of getting this. Is not India the home of yoga? It is also possib to be too interested in games. When we think of the Gree
ideal expressed in the Latin phrase, 'mens sana in cor......_o--- sano' (a healthy mind in a healthy body), we should not		e that it is the mind which is mentioned first. And if w l	s
become the most important thi our lives w		e in danger of changing the Olympic	to to 'the i	thing
5. Nevertheless, in spite oft	n	rs¥,	uescabne


gain great benefits.

'9.

Passage Analysis	I'>
• The writer uses fi  agra K-/
• Each par	deals s?Ziiue llywith a topic.
- Paragra ntrodu		esubject, and makes a general statement abo	portance of games.
- Paragraph 2 expi°W	the benefits of playing games.
- Paragrae	ls with the moral benefits.
Paragra	als with the disadvantages and dangers.
- Par aph 5 sums up the writer's opinion, taking into a ll hheasaisd in paragraphs 2, 3 and 4, i.e. it the conclusion. The structure (or plan) of the essay
, ummed upinthefollowing flow diagram.

92	HORNBILL

Pl: Introduction











Moral danger(l):
Mind and body
·	+i)IP5:Conclusion  in  thIe


Moral danger (2): winning too important

,,

_	form of summary _	'C,-1
Activity
Here are a few topics for essay inN	ollo	s listed above to write on thesetopic		"''
1. Himalayan  quake  2005.	... "-. '"V
2. Those who can bear a(";,a	e all.
3. Fascinating facts i er.  "
4. Public health in	·on.   ,,  ;('
5. Human population  rows u-.( 'Ci/
6. Success bQ.nthemind.'
7. Think bef	shop,D.
   The trend of		thCehild Sex Ratio (CSR) defined as the numb	girls per 1000 boys between 0-6 years of age, h mained unabated till today. To ensure survival, pnyc  and empowerment of the girl child, the governme- as announced Beti Bachao, Beti Padhao
scheme. is isbeing implemented through a national campaie,\ 'lfre objectives of this scheme are:
• Mon of gender-biased sex selection elimination.
• 1'8uring survival and protection of the girl child.
• Ensuring education and participation of the girl child.
    Organise as essay writing activity in your class, the themes should be based on the objectives stated above. Mention how you can contribute to this programme, in the essay.


