



11072CH11





THE purpose of sub-titling is to convey the main idea or theme of each section of a long piece of writing. It helps the reader know
a glance the sub-topics that are being addressed. Giving suitab sub-titles helps break the monotony of reading long passages.

Read the newspaper article given below and do
that follow.	•	......
A new deal	bl	cit
The example of Curitib	i	w -	attracted global attentionfor in lja'¥rban		a 'Yn_glow-cost
technologies, sh at ·clusivM	pment models for urbanrenew

     any cities n iaaccuratelyored fundamental public health mirror		ch E				issues inherited from colonial rule. description of			an centr		i	There is little evidence to show that nineteenth century En			npolicymakers assimilated the lessons today. "Streets that arer ally from the Surat public health unpaved, rough, d ·				fillecl with disaster. State and municipal vegetable and an ·			re			e, without governments did not pursue reform sewers or gutter		u				pplied with in waste management, though civic foul, stagn poo				stead," wrote conditions in Surat itself underwent Engels on t	iving conditions of the change in the plague aftermath.

working

hat country.	During the past decade, many cities
pursued development agendas-often

Urb	with the help of massive international Thetns of urban decay in India loans-to project 'modernisation' at came to global notice during the the cost of basic civic reform. pneumonic plague of 1994 in Surat; it	There is thus a continuing epitomised the failure of governments challenge before the current mission in the post-Independence era and to enable and also compel local exposed development policies that governments  to  abide  by the

86	HORNBILL

prov1s10ns of the Municipal Solid		It comes as no surprise therefore Waste Management Rules by which that pedestrians and bicycle riders, they are legally bound.	who form 30 to 70 per cent of peak Post-liberalisation policies have hour traffic in most urban centres, tended to largely disregard other key also make up a large proportion of factors that affect the quality of life fatalities in road accidents. A paper in cities and towns: poverty, lack of prepared by the Transport Research sanitation, water shortages, gross and Injury Prevention Programme undersupply of affordable housing, (TRIPP) of the Indian Institute of and	traffic chaos generated by Technology, Delhi, says pedestrian automobile dependence, in turn fatalities in Mumbai and Delhi were created by neglect of public transport. nearly 78 per cent and 53 per cent
  In the absence of a hygienic of the total, according to receh environment and safe water supply, data, compared to 13 per cent a chronic water-borne diseases such 12 per cent in Germany and t as cholera and other communicable United States.
·  diseases continue to stalk the poor	Such alarming death at
in the biggest cities.	an equally high injury ra	ould
It must be sobering to the affluent pe s	de policymak	revisit
layers of the population that nearly th	an	gies and
14 million Indian households t edisto ·o  .  ut many (forming 26 per cent of the total -	cha	· ave actually the urban areas donot have a lat  e  o   the  r  er e -  reduced
within the house, as per the	£  tpaths a  asforpedestrian
of India 2001; some 14 per ce t hav		se to fac · a	unrestricted use of only rudimentary 'pit' fac	i	moto e	e ides.
number of househol	·	ut a	tice in progressive world
drainage connection sta	s a	een  different. Curitiba in
million (represe ·			22.1 er cent		r		, which has attracted global of households).	gr tion to cities			ention for innovative urban plans continues and i					cture t		 using low-cost technologies, has sewage is grossly 1		equate t?._."f:;f;/ done everything	that Indian the demand even where		policymakers would dread to do. It is unlikely that the				of Starting in the 1970s, this provincial the urban enviroilt canbecentre with the highest per capita dramatically im d			erefore, if ownership of cars in Brazil (other such fundament		u				ons remain than the capital) at the time, banned
unresolved		 automobiles from many crowded Urban t sport receives scant areas in favour of pedestrians, built attentio'9; olicymakers. Policy an internationally acknowledged bus dist i			s have led to rising system that reduced household aut		· e dependency, higher commutingexpendituretobelowthe safet	'sks for road users, and land national average, and created new use plans that are based not on the housing areas that were provided needs of people, but primarily transportlinks in a planned manner. designed to facilitate use of private Some of the	prestigious land motorised vehicles.	development in the city, including a





SUB-TITLING	87

new Opera House, came up in policies that, ironically, allow filling abandoned sites such as quarries.	of existing wetlands by real estate The bus-way system cut riding lobbies, leading to flooding. The time by a third, Scientific American residents then demand expensive
noted in a review in the mid-1990s, new storm water drains.
by providing for advance ticketing,		Examples such as Curitiba show specially-designed boarding areas that inclusive development models with wider doors for entry/exit and for urban renewal are workable. If dedicated lanes for faster transit.	only the state and local governments In another low-cost initiative, can be persuaded to adopt a rights­ Curitiba managed floods with a based  approach  to affordable dedication that Mumbai, Bangalore, housing, sanitation, water supply,
and Chennai can only marvel at. The mobility and a clean environmen city created large artificial lakes in instead of a market-oriented mod suitable places that filled up in the that lays excessive emphasis monsoon, avoiding flooding of recovery of costs incurred by t residential areas. In the summer, oriented private sect r	e
these lakes turned into parks to provision.	Support	r	a
provide recreational spaces.	pro°§sive  middle	trade
State administrations and urban un  rr · s equal	to bring
planning bodies in India follow	uine u'-	wal
·o,=	;


Activity		

<'.)

1. Notice the italici ten Pc t thteoopf the article which tell	a glance w article isabout.
2. Divide the  · into f .ections based on the shifts in the sub-topics an giv le sub-heading for each section. One has been don  o  ou in the article as an example.
3. Look for pictu ·n ewspapers and magazines that depict the urban		oblems discussed in the text. Cut them out and pi	to the text at appropriate places.


"


