
11072CH03
- PIJMVff't1J Ttl: & it! tM!M&feJ
A. l(  1'011!:tD 
Notice these expressions in the text.	V"\.e. ;
Infer their meaning from the contextA_	?	'	•

forensic reconstruction		treas scudded across	I,c ven '
casket grey	o put:d,i¥aphy
resurrection	eene de



-  7""""c----	He s just a teenager when he
.. ·...	).	'riied. Thelast heir of a powe,jul
1	ily that had ruled Egypt and its
,	empire for centuries, he was laid to
/	rest laden with gold and eventually
.--==---=; 111 1...	forgotten. Since the discovery of his
tomb in 1922, the modern world has speculated about what happened to him, with murder being the most extreme possibility. Now, leaving his tomb for the first time in almost 80 years, Tut has undergone a CT scan that offers new clues about his life and death -
and provides precise data for an accurate forensic reconstruction of the boyish pharaoh.





DISCOVERING TuT: THESAGA CONTINUES	23

AN angry wind stirred up ghostly dust devils as King Tut was taken from his resting place in the ancient Egyptian cemetery known as the Valley of the Kings*. Dark-bellied clouds had scudded across the desert sky all day and now were veiling the stars in casket grey. It was 6 p.m. on 5 January 2005. The world's most famous mummy glided head first into a CT scanner brought here to probe the lingering medical mysteries of this little understood young ruler who died more than 3,300 years ago.
   All afternoon the usual line of tourists from around the world had descended into the cramped, rock-cut tomb some 26 feet underground to pay their respects. They gazed at the murals on th walls of the burial chamber and peered at Tut's gilded face, the mo striking feature of his mummy-shaped outer coffin lid. Some visito read from guidebooks in a whisper. Others stood silently, pe pondering Tut's untimely death in his late teens, or won
a shiver if the pharaoh's curse -  d a	r misfortune f:
those who disturbed him -  was re	e.	?
   "The mummy is in very bad c tio be au • tCarter did in the 1920s," said Zahi H , ret 11of Egypt's Supreme Council of AntiquU s  s  lelun  ye the body for a
long first look. Carter-H r   rter,   t    was the British
archaeologist who i di overe	mb after years of futile searching. Its c te  , ough ha · ansacked in antiquity, were surprisingly com   .  ey reQi]  richest royal collection
ever found an e bee			e part4faraoh's legend. Stunning artefacts in	, heir eternaillliance meant to guarantee resurrection,		d a se4i.on at the time of the discovery - and still get the mo	"-'1.. ButTutwasalso buried with everyday things he'd			t		the afterlife: board games, a bronze
razor, linen under err s,cases of food and wine.
   After mont f refully recording the pharaoh's funerary treasures, Ca r gan investigating his three nested coffins. Openin firs , e found a shroud adorned with garlands of willow		·v: leaves, wild celery, lotus petals, and cornflowers, the fad  e · ence of a burial in March or April. When he finally rea	mummy, though, he ran into trouble. The ritual resins had ciened, cementing Tut to the bottom of his solid gold coffin. "No amount of legitimate force could move them," Carter wrote later. "What was to be done?"
   The sun can beat down like a hammer this far south in Egypt, and Carter tried to use it to loosen the resins. For several hours

* See map on next page

24	HORNBILL






Mediterranean Sea



NEW KINGDOM







Western
Desert

Memphis
(
\




SAUDI
ARABIA
N


I I I I I I I I I I J





DISCOVERING TuT: THESAGA CONTINUES	25

he set the mummy outside in blazing sunshine that heated it to
149 degrees Fahrenheit. Nothing budged. He reported with scientific detachment that "the consolidated material had to be chiselled away from beneath the limbs and trunk before it was possible to raise the king's remains."
   In his defence, Carter really had little choice. Ifhe hadn't cut the  mummy  free,  thieves  most  certainly  would  have circumvented the guards and ripped it apart to remove the gold. In Tut's time the royals were fabulously wealthy, and they thought -	or hoped -	they could take their riches with them. For his journey to the great beyond, King Tut was lavished wit glittering goods: precious collars, inlaid necklaces and bracelet rings, amulets, a ceremonial apron, sandals, sheaths for his fin
and	toes, and the now iconic inner coffin and mask -  all ofi
gold. To separate Tut from his adornments, Carter's m	cl

the mummy's head and severed

majo5 3	c,nce

they had finished, they reassembl  e remai		ayer of sand in a wooden box with pad tha once	aamage, the bed where Tut nowrests	"
Archaeology has  cha	b  ant ·a1	e intervening
decades, focusing less o  rea    and   r    the fascinating
details oflife and int · i m teries			. lt also uses more sophisticated tools,· ·n m di		ology. In 1968, more than 40 years after   r  r's di	,  n anatomy professor
X-rayed	reveale	s	· gfact: beneath the resin
that cakes his  e  his br t-bo  andfront ribs are missing.
   Today dia tic im · can be done with computed tomography, or CT,	undreds of X-rays in cross section are put together like sli fbread tocreate a three-dimensional virtual body. Wh re would a CT scan reveal of Tut than the
X-ray? And	two of the  biggest questions still
lingering abou · - howdid he die, and how old was he at the time of hi eath.
  Kin emise waasbig event, even by royal standards. He was e st of his family's line, and his funeral was the death rat	ynasty. But the particulars of his passing away and its afte fu areunclear.
   Amenhotep III -Tut's father or grandfather-was a powerful pharaoh who ruled for almost four decades at the height of the eighteenth dynasty's golden age. His son Amenhotep IV succeeded him and initiated one of the strangest periods in the history of

26	HORNBILL

ancient Egypt. The new pharaoh promoted the worship of the Aten, the sun disk, changed his name to Akhenaten, or 'servant of the Aten,' and moved the religious capital from the old city of Thebes to the new city of Akhetaten, known now as Amarna. He further shocked the country by attacking Amun, a major god, smashing his images and closing his temples. "It must have been a horrific time," said Ray Johnson, director of the University of Chicago's research centre in Luxor, the site of ancient Thebes. "The family that had ruled for centuries was coming to an end, and then Akhenaten went a little wacky."
   After Akhenaten's death, a mysterious ruler nam Smenkhkare appeared briefly and exited with hardly a trac And then a very young Tutankhaten took the throne -
Tuat she's widely known today. The boy king soon chang	1
name to Tutankhamun, 'living image of Amun,' and	a
restoration of the old ways. He reig or about n ·ars - anthedn died unexpectedly.	?
   Regardless of his fame and the			ula	ns ab		-f.l!te,Tutis one mummy among many in E	.		o man&?		ows.The Egyptian Mummy Project, w	 e				an ·							in late 2003, has recorded almost 600 s				s still c		n		. The next phase: scanning the m ·e ·		a rtableR;.				·		e donated by the National Geographic	·	an s ·em			·			anufacturer. KingTut
is oneof the first m	e sc	death, as in life, moving
regally ahead · coun	en.
A CT ma   n   canned  he   mmy head to toe, creating
1,700 digital	images   oss section. Tut's head, scanned in 0.62 millimetre slictei-""l!Wi :ster its intricate structures, takes on eerie detail in the  lting image. With Tut's entire body similarly recorde  team of specialists in radiology, forensics, and anatomy '-..:.I ...  robe the secrets that thewinged goddesses of a gilded bur  s rine protected for so long.
   The i  of tlie scan, workmen carried Tut from the tomb in his box ·  allbearers they climbed a ramp and a flight of stairs i o he swirling sand outside, then rose on a hydraulic lift	e trailer that held the scanner. Twenty minutes later two ; emerged, sprinted for an office nearby, and returned with a pair of white plastic fans. The million-dollar scanner had quit because of sand in a cooler fan. "Curse of the pharaoh," joked a guard nervously.





DISCOVERING TuT: THESAGA CONTINUES	27
   Eventually the substitute fans worked well enough to finish the procedure. After checking that no data had been lost, the technicians turned Tut over to the workmen, who carried him back to his tomb. Less than three hours after he was removed from his coffin, the pharaoh again rested in peace where the funerary priests had laid him so long ago.
   Back in the trailer a technician pulled up astonishing images of Tut on a computer screen. A grey head took shape from a scattering of pixels, and the technician spun and tilted it in every direction. Neck vertebrae appeared as clearly as in an anatomy class. Other images revealed a hand, several views of the rib cag and a transection of the skull. But for nowthe pressure was o Sitting back in his chair, Zahi Hawass smiled, visibly re ie that nothing had gone seriously wrong. "I didn't sleep last
not for a second," he said. "I was so worried. But n	I
will go and skep."	?

























Mural in King Tut's tomb showing King Tut with Osiris, the god of the afterlife

28	HORNBILL

   By the time we left the trailer, descending metal stairs to the sandy ground, the wind had stopped. The winter air lay cold and still, like death itself, in this valley of the departed. Just above the entrance to Tut's tomb stood Orion - the constellation that the ancient Egyptians knew as the soul of Osiris, the god of the afterlife - watching over the boy king.

(Source: National Geographic, Vol 207, No. 6)

Understanding the text	¦	0
I. Give reasons for the following.	e;
(i) King Tut's body has been su5:1e ed to repeate	irry.
(ii) Howard Carter's investigatio	resentedt
(iii) Carter had to chisel away 1 ified r	raise the king's remains.	,,.	'
(iv) Tut's body was	with g:l	sures.
(v) The	boy king ch	ged	s name	Tutankhaten  to
Tutankhamu .
2. (i) List the deed	d Ray	tdeoscribe Akhenaten as "wacky".		./"-'
(ii) What w e results of t1'  CT scan?
(iii) List th ces i?nology that have improved forensic analysis.
(iv) Explain the sta . "King Tut is one of the first mummies to be scanned :.::_ eath, as in life	"
0
: u Ilh gtl::u:::two¦pfilrs, each pfilrma	group
takin,!11111.!fW ite points of view.
1. ·err ific intervention is necessary to unearth buried mysteries.
2. Advanced technology gives us conclusive evidence of past events.
3. Traditions, rituals and funerary practices must be respected.
4. Knowledge about the past is useful to complete our knowledge of the world we live in.





DISCOVERING TuT: THESAGA CONTINUES	29
Thinking about language	¦

1. Read the following piece of information from The Encyclopedia of Language by David Crystal.
Egyptian is now extinct: its history dates from before the third millennium B.C., preserved in many hieroglyphic inscriptions and papyrus manuscripts. Around the second century A.D., it developed into a language known as Coptic. Coptic may still have been used as late as the early nineteenth century and is still used as a religious language by Monophysite Christians in Egypt.
2. What do you think are the reasons for the extinction languages?
3. Do you think it is important to preserve languages?	'C/
4. In what ways do you think we co help prevent th tion
of languages and dialects?	;	"	?

Working with word /
1. Given below are some i4e om ·	of words. Explain why they have be n ether.
(i) ghostly dust	D.0.	dark-bellied  clouds
(ii) deser	'	i) casket grey

(iii) stun  (i}tefacts

(viii)  eternal brilliance

(iv) funera	easures	(ix)  ritual resins
(v) scientific  det	(x)  virtual body
2. Here are some	om y used medical terms. Find out their
Things to do	¦
1. The constellation Orion is associated with the legend of Osiris, the god of the afterlife.

30	HORNBILL

Find out the astronomical descriptions and legends associated with the following.
(i) Ursa Major (Saptarishi mandala)
(ii) Polaris (Dhruva tara)
(iii) Pegasus (Winged horse)
(iv) Sirius (Dog star)
(v) Gemini (Mithuna)
2. Some of the leaves and flowers mentioned in the passage for adorning the dead are willow, olive, celery, lotus, cornflower. Which of these are common in our country?
3. Name some leaves and flowers that are used as adornments
our country.
Note	.9"

Understanding the text	¦

t-i;§'

:::::g	
Debate on issues rai	·		he te;;,c;,; o rediscovering history with the help of technol		; respec'	it  ns (reflection on issues)

Thinking ab nguage	•
Extinction of l g	age preservation
Working with words V
Undecstandin Qa1 collocations; common medical terms

Things t	•
• Vonomical facts and legends (across the curriculum)
• F	t botanical correlates



















The Laburnum top is silent, quite still
In the afternoon yellow September sunlight,	r,
A few leaves yellowing, all its seeds fallen,	'C/
Till the goldfinch comes, with a twit	ing chirru	r A suddenness, a startlement, at	ra		end.'-.,._ Then sleek as a lizard, and aler...111"'..i.ibrupt, , ,
She enters the thickness, a	hine st
Of chitterings, and a tremB	·	, and.,.t1'1ij_1-f-
The	whole tree trembles	d t	s.
It is the engine of he
She stokes it full, tH		ou	h-end Showing her barred fa	identL ....,.....

Then with eer	ate w e-chirrup whisperings She launches t	infinite

And the laburnum sub	to empty.
"o
¦ la	: ashort tree with hanging branches, yellow
...'V	flowers and  poisonous seeds
finch: asmall singing bird with yellow feathers on its wings
¦

32	HORNBILL

Find out	¦

1. What laburnum is called in your language.
2. Which local bird is like the goldfinch.

Think it out	¦
fio
1. What do you notice about the beginning and the ending of the poem?
2. To what is the bird's movement compared? What is the basis the	comparison?
3. Why is the image of the engine evoked by the poet?	r>
4. What do you like most about the poem?	'C,/
5. What does the phrase "her barre	idenlil\m  ?

Note down	¦
1. the sound words


2. the movementw:_\..,
3. the dominant col

poee.c\

List the f@mg ¦
1. Words which desc <Z'a,l,e,rt' and 'abrupt'.
2. Words with the soun	as in 'chart' and 'tr' as in 'trembles' in the poem.
3. Othersom\.,		frequently in the poem.

Thinki  bout language	¦
Loo'A,.Oe other poem on a bird or a tree in English or any other lan g!!'.

Try this out	¦
Write four lines in verse form on any tree that you see around you.





THE LABURNUM TOP	33

---Notes---
This poem has been placed after a text which has references to names of plants for thematic sequencing.

Understanding the poem	¦
• Glossing of 'laburnum' and ·goldfinch'
• Factual understanding
• Movement of thought and structuring (poetic sensitivity)
• Focus on figures of speech and imagery used (poetic sensitivity)
• Attention to sounds, lexical collocations (poetic sensitivity)
Thinking  about language	¦	(2,
• Finding equivalents in other languages (multilingu
• Relating to thematically simila oems in other1 uages
(multilingualism)	"'	?
• Attempt al cceallvily
v"J
,e'Q.
(c)	e
'O
"'o
O"
"









fl/,1/f  fl/l!f/2,,b 
And who art thou? said I to the soft-falling showe'V"'\,.e; Which, strange to tell, gave me a*swer, aser "lated: I am the Poem of Earth, said*"  of th'-.   ,.J
Eternal I rise impalpable		lan	ottomless sea,	_		"-.'V
Upward to heaven, e	, vagu rm'd, altogether changed, and ye t
I descend to lav	ought	es, dust-layers of the globe,		J'CJ
And all t	them witho me were seeds only, latent, unborn;		f>.
A d.forever, by	ight, Igive back life to my own ongm,		""
And makfe JAdbeautify it;
(For song g from its birth-place, after fulfilment,
wandyg
RecoMireck'd, duly with love returns.)

¦ lpable: something that cannot be touched
lave: wash; bathe
atomies: tiny particles
latent: hidden
¦





THE  VOICE OF THE RAIN	35

Think it out	¦
I. 1. There are two voices in the poem. Who do they belong to? Which lines indicate this?
2. What does the phrase "strange to tell" mean?
3. There is a parallel drawn between rain and music. Which words indicate this? Explain the similarity between the two.
4. How is the cyclic movement of rain brought out in the poem? Compare it with what you have learnt in science.
5. Why are the last two lines put within brackets?
6. List the pairs of opposites found in the poem.
II. Notice the following sentence patterns.	(2,
1. And who art thou? said I to the soft-falling sho
2. I am the Poem of Earth, said t oice of th:e a	'	....

3. EternalI  rise	'"	./
4. For song ... duly with lov	'
os.e... '-..°V
III. Look for some more p	ms	he rain ee hothis wone is
d!ffe,ent fromthe

No
This is a nature poem	g thceoming of the rain.

Understanding  the  p	•
• Voices in
• Sense of thevm
• Relatin he process of rainfall scientifically (across the
currA
• 'ftt{ sentence structure in poems
• ;arison with other rain poems


