



11072CH13





LETTER-WRITING is an important channel of communication between people who are geographically distant from one another. In earlier times when the telephone and e-mail were not availabl , the only means of communication between people was throu letters.
Letter-writing is a skill that has to be developed.
there are two types of letters: forma ,	 at are written	c	vey official business and informatio	d infor l		h are
personal letters to communicate2:	ds a1' i.'Formal
letters are sent out when w rr		wri 1tms public bodies or agencies for our re i		ts in · li . For example, we might have to ask for e ·· ateorto  rmachange in our address. A lette ·s su ly on			ries of exchanges Formal Lette	.( e;
Let us now e	some	he eps inwriting formal letters.
1. (i) Introducing o e	· is the first time you are writing
(ii) Referring to an	r letter if you are responding to it.
2. Stating the	of the letter
3. (i)  Statin n/information required.from the addressee
(ii) Ex ng action taken/ supplying information
4. g action to be taken
ing assistance infuture
          he basic structure of a letter. It will have to be modified according to the purpose for which it is written and the person to whom it is addressed.

94	HoRNBILL

When you wrtte a letter you should keep in mind the following points.
1. Purpose
2. Person to whom it is addressed
3. Tone you should adopt
4. Completeness of the message
5. Action required
6. Conciseness of expression
We have so far considered the content of letters. A letter also has a typical format.
1. Name and address of sender
Companies have printed letterheads with the nam company printed on them. A letterhead may also c
name and designation of perso_ny	responsibl'l  it	s.
2. Name and address of address,"	?
3. Date
4. Mode of address or salu	,	..._,
Salutation is the	¥ssing Yn.We may  have
the following for
(i) Dear Sir /M		en W e'/4	ingtoa total stranger whom we do	now
(ii) Dear  s/Dr/Profe	r + Surname as in: Dear Dr
Sinh		en it	fomalrelationship with the addre	and th ter does not know him or her personally).
(iii) Dear Sujata ( n thewriter knows the addressee
personalle:	the two share a semi-formal relationship).
5. Referencevious correspondence, if any.
Mosticial letters carry a subject line just above the
sal Wfhis isforquick reference to the subject.
6. 11.Jofletter
ontent of the letter begins on the next line and is ged in two or three paragraphs.
7. Complimentary close and signature
Letters usually end politely with the following phrases: Thank you, With regards, With best wishes, Hope to see





LETTER-WRITING	95

you soon, Hope to receive an early reply etc. The complimentary close is followed by 'Yours sincerely/ Yours truly', and the writer's signature in the next line.

Given below is an example of the format of a formal letter.

Ritu Patel
Manager, Customer Services Vijayanagar Gas Company 121, Ameerpet
Hyderabad 500 016
12 November 2005

Mr Shagun Thomas
801, Vijay Apartments			t:,,"..'- .... Begumpet	"	•,-.,1 Hyderabad 500 016

Sub: Your application	or aonnection

Withrega o Yours Vicer , Rit1S:j"lt,;

No s altlhpearts of a letter are aligned on the left. This style is called the Full-Block style.
• The date and signature are very important in letters.
• We do not use commas after every line in the address.

96	HoRNBILL
• Do not begin your letters with hackneyed expressions like, 'With reference to your letter dated 10 January'. Instead, use personalised variations like, 'I was glad to receive your letter of IO January...' or 'We were happy to note from your letter that the goods have reached you safely...'
• Never end your letters with hanging participles like 'Thanking you' or 'Awaiting your reply'. Instead write, 'Thank you' or 'We/I await/look forward to your reply'.

Informal Letters
Informal letters include personal letters. Ifit is a personal lett the format is flexible. We might just write the name of our ci top, followed by the date.	"'



:::o ::::.r 2005



v"J
rt<






Bye, V
 You Mionately /With love/ t%,lllest/Take care etc.


(Signature)





LETTER-WRITING	97

The flexible format of the informal letter may also be used to seek information from concerned authorities. Given below is an example.


179 NCERT Campus Sri Aurobindo Marg New Delhi 110 016

9 September 2005

98	HoRNBILL

• To address someone whose name you do not know you can write: Dear Sir, Dear Madam, Dear Sirs, Dear Sir/ Madam.
• To address someone by name, use their title and surname
e.g. Dear Dr Balakrishnan.
• To end a letter, use 'Yours sincerely', if you have addressed the person by name; 'Yours faithfully', if you have begun the letter with 'Dear Sir' or 'Madam', etc.


Job Application
At some point of time each one of us will have to apply for

ajoo

Job	applications are usually written in response advertisements.
Let us take this sample advertisement from a daily n
The Hindu dated 15 November 20	•
0
Come...join O.:u
Customer S
Graduat i	a hol r
wi h/  i	OU	exs
pos  s ·	oodC	o	er
Se	s.ExceQs	en andw tten cc4rX.fcation
ls iEnglish	must.
din yotf>P.plications with
yo rr ndpassport e hotograph to:
DERLAND
OMMUNICATIONS,
\l_TH STREET, SALEM,
-"'	TAMIL NADU

LetS?Omethat you have a degree or a diploma and are app  ·n  for the job. We need to prepare a resume, which actually
mean a summary of particulars relating to your background, academic qualifications and experience, if any. Other terms used for 'resume' are 'curriculum vitae' and 'biodata'.





LETTER-WRITING	99
The general format of a resume or curriculum vitae is shown below.


CURRICULUM VITAE

Name Address
Telephone Number E-mail ID
Date of birth
Academic Qualifications

sion






Experience(c)	:  (B	in from present
0mployment)


Skills
Languages kn°"'

'O=

Hobbies an Msts
Achiev s
R Qs




(names of people in positions like your school Prinicipal who can certify your character and conduct)

100	HoRNBILL

Now we need to send a covering letter along with the curriculum vitae. The following letter is an example.


Your name and address Date


The Manager
Human Resource Division Wonderland Communications South Street, Salem
Tamil Nadu

Dear Sir,

The , eo

I would like to apply for the p of Custo r	rt
Executive that you have adv:  ;		15
November 2005.
   I have just completed	i oma i		unication from the State Polyte ic.		asha	otethat you
do not insiston e	nc.
If selected, t ·	11	em	1  t · b. I am a sincere,
honest and har	o		ing P,eO	am friendly and outgoingave		ocdo	ation skills.
I am e	os· g my resume	d look forward to meeting
you in per
Regards,	"'
Yours truly,	""
(Signature"'  0
ActA._O
1. 	have not received your Roll Number card for the Class XII examination. Write a letter to the Registrar, Examination Branch, CBSE asking for it.





LETTER-WRITING	101

2. Write a letter to the President, Residents' Welfare Association of your locality suggesting some measures that could be taken for solving the problem of water scarcity and conserving water.
3. Write a letter to the editor of a newspaper expressing your views on the deteriorating law and order situation in your city.
4. Write a letter to your friend narrating your experiences in a rescue operation.
5. Write a letter to the Editor of a magazine describing a dance performance you have seen or an art gallery you have visited.


