
11072CH14





THE teacher was explaining the lines in the beginning of Shakespeare's play Macbeth. It was a description of the battle and the lines were:	.).,,.
Like Valour's minion, carved out his passage,	V
Till he faced the slave;	r'>
With ne'er shook hands, nor baded farewell to ht    'CJ
Till he unseam'd him from the	to the c:alf' ,    ....
    The teacher asked the stud ' t thJl,eaemed' meant. It was difficult. The		odd d	on. "What does 'seam' mean? Haven'  o  er com  c s the word?" One of the students blur	t " ricket..b_ "'II.
   This is an example f h eacl reacts towords according to what our J,,,. 'herien  h  been.
   When we write	factual	ation, all of us write almost similarly. But  en we 'f[ipeasure each of us may write about t e event inrent ways.
One very imp t elem n creative writing is imagination. This is re!ected in	v-\".'CJ
• our view or perspe
• choice of won
• the compa o e make
• the inysuse
• theVadopt
• J'	fideas.
Lest tudy theparagraph below.
A town is like an animal. A town has a nervous system and a head and shoulders and feet. A town is a thing separate from all other towns, so that there are no towns alike. And a town has a whole emotion. How news travels through a town





CREATIVE WRITING	103
is a mystery not easily to be solved. News seems to move faster than small boys can scramble and dart to tell it, faster than women can call it over the fences. (from an adapted version of Steinbeck's The PearO
The topic: ATown
Analogy or comparison: to an animal
Word choice: "has a whole emotion."
Comparisons: "faster than small boys can scramble and dart, faster than women	"
We find the first element of imagination operating in the way th writer visualises the town. Then he extends the primary analo The tone he adopts is light humour, a little sarcastic.
When we begin to write a story or poem we let our
free. We try to say things in a ne ay. This nov	what makes our writing pleasurable to , der. •
Sometimes sentence struc ur		o d •ffe	m factual writing. Consider the follo ·	:,'		---
They waited in their		ai		til the.		came in, and then they cackled	fou	t an	d anthdreatened
until they reache 'lW.!lfw,est p	e he fisherman would stand. (from The	(> ?
In	a normal c ucti nw,e	use somany 'ands'. But
the action of e tory is be;tected through this kind of chaining of a: s thro..Q :ands'. It is appropriate to the movement of the act ed.
Let us  look at  anotherple:
Shdraegged fter heinrto Miss Rachel's sitting-room, which opeVd'-ter bedroom. At her bedroom door stood Misshel r face almost white as the white dressing­
gown ore.
TheauC has  used a simile: "white as the white dressing­
go	ore."
Inf	the whiteness of a human face is because of a strong emotion -	fear or shock.
But here comparing the whiteness to the dressing-gown she wore serves to exaggerate and intensify the emotion.

104	HORNBILL

Exaggeration is one of the ways in which fact is distinguished from fiction.
Now look at these lines from a well-known poem, 'An Elegy Written in a Country Churchyard' by Thomas Gray.
Full many a gem of purest ray serene The dark unfathom'd caves of ocean bear
Full many a flower is born to blush unseen And waste its fragrance in the desert air.
The stanza carries a simple statement: many people with outstanding qualities live and die unnoticed by the world.
To state this, the poet has used two strong images, 'a gem' a 'a flower'.	r>
He has used two contrasting places: the ocean, th i water and the desert with no wat r a all.
Also notice the rhyming words: 'sere	d 'unseen'?'b	tl 'air'.
The first and third lines also b	he sa	s -"full many a". The lines are of eq?)?tli':'		'

All this together
Activity I	.........	0

of these lines.

Put down the image ome4"end immediately when you see the w	·n the box. '
cat	wall	pond	bird

Activity II
Try to write four	of poetry or four sentences of prose with one of these a '-larting point.

Activity
Write a&t story beginning with this sentence:
the last of the guests left, I went back into the hall....

Activity IV
Look for a story, a poem and a newspaper article on environment conservation and see how the style of each is different from the other.


