
11072CHOS
Tk .A,111!! F! Mff: & (jrebt
u ve;,,,ed--'J R:i e


11/,!Mi  P,,/ft	

Notice these expressions in thet	'-.
I,ifer their meaningfrom the
'V
sustainabledevelopm .,.V
languish	J""><!I trophic depletion
ignominious darkness	'	a	cending concern
(c)
The following arti	ritten byNani Palkhivala and
published in The In		xpress on 24 November 1994. The issues that her	re arding the declining health of the earth
continue  to    vance.

ONcEann recall any movement in world history which has grippe litfagination of the entire human race so completely and dly astheGreen Movement which started nearly twe - e years ago. In 1972 the world's first nationwide Green party as founded in New Zealand. Since then, the movement has not looked back.
    We have shifted - one hopes, irrevocably - from the mechanistic view to a holistic andecological view of the world. It is a shift in human perceptions as revolutionary as that





THE AILING PLANET: THE GREEN MOVEMENT'S ROLE	37

introduced by Copernicus who taught mankind in the sixteenth century that the earth and the other planets revolved round the sun. For the first time in human history, there is a growing worldwide consciousness that the earth itself is a living organism- anenormous being of which we are parts. It has its own metabolic needs and vital processes which need to be respected and preserved.
    The earth's vital signs reveal a patient in declining health. We have begun to realise our ethical obligations to be good stewards of the planet and responsible trustees of the legacy to future generations.
    The concept of sustainable development was popularise in 1987 by the World Commission on Environment Development. In its report it defined the idea as "Develop
that meets the needs of the present, without compro	·			e ability of future generations to me t	eir needs", i ,			·tout stripping the natural world of r	 ces futu		rations
woulIdn ntheeedz.oo at Lusaka, Z ·a, e is a ''		the notice reads, The world's most dan	s  imal'.  ·  the cage there is no animal but a mirror.  he    u see	f. Thanks to the
efforts of a numbe	n	s in ountries, anew awareness has now		upon t	dangerous animal in
the world. He has rea	e the -	hifting from a system based on domi	·on to one ba	rtnership.
    Scientist	catalo ed a ut 1.4 million living species with which m d shar		earth. Estimates vary widely as regards the still-uncc-.:vaai  iving species- biologists reckon that about three to a		red million other living species still languish unn m  ·  ignominious darkness.
Oneof th	· ternational commissions which dealt, inter
alia, with the q ·on of ecology and environment was the Brandt Commis which hada distinguished Indian as one of its membe	L.K. Jha. The First Brandt Report raised the questio  'Are we to leave our successors a scorched planet of ad g deserts, impoverished landscapes and ailing envi ent?"
    Mr Lester R. Brown in his thoughtful book, The Global Economic Prospect, points out that the earth's principal biological systems are four - fisheries, forests, grasslands, and croplands -  and they form the foundation of the  global

38	HORNBILL

economic system. In addition to supplying our food, these four systems provide virtually all the raw materials for industry except minerals and petroleum-derived synthetics. In large areas of the world, human claims on these systems are reaching an unsustainable level, a point where their productivity is being impaired. When this happens, fisheries collapse, forests disappear, grasslands are converted into barren wastelands, and croplands deteriorate. In a protein-conscious and protein­ hungry world, over-fishing is common every day. In poor countries, local forests are being decimated in order to procure firewood for cooking. In some places, firewood has become expensive that "what goes under the pot nowcosts more tha what goes inside it". Since the tropical forest is, in the
Dr  Myers, "the powerhouse of evolution", several species  f
face extinction as a result of its destruction.
    It has been well said that fores recede man i eS"erts follow. The world's ancient patrim  f tropic llii 1s now eroding at the rate of forty to fi  illi acre			, and the growing use of dung for bumi	n s th		important natural fertiliser. The World B s ates	e-fold increase in the rate of forest plant   i    ded to  op  ·th the expected
fuelwood demand in  OO.
James  Speth,	reside	e World Resources
Institute, said the ot	y, "	e ing that we are losing the forests a acre aseco  ,   it is much closer to an acre-and-a-h  t  secon ".
    Article 4		the Co._'ii,.ii.,.,tion of India provides that "the State shall endeavo _..,,.._ct andimprove the environment and to safeguard the fo  and wildlife of the country". But what causes endless a ·sh isthefact that laws are never respected nor enforced				(For instance, the Constitution says that casteism, unt			ility and bonded labour shall be abolished, but the rish shamelessly even after forty-four years of the operatio		Constitution.) A recent report of our Parliament's Estima  s  ommittee has highlighted the near catastrophic de	of India's forests over the last four decades. India, ac ;g toreliable data, is losing its forests at the rate of 3. 7 million acres a year. Large areas, officially designated as forest land, "are already virtually treeless". The actual loss of forests is estimated to be about eight times the rate indicated by government statistics.





THE AILING PLANET: THE GREEN MOVEMENT'S ROLE	39

    A three-year study using satellites and aerial photography conducted by the United Nations, warns that the environment has deteriorated so badly that it is 'critical' in many of the eighty­ eight countries investigated.
    There can be no doubt that the growth of world population is one of the strongest factors distorting the future of human society. It took mankind more than a million years to reach the first billion. That was the world population around the year 1800. By the year 1900, a second billion was added, and the twentieth
century has added another 3.7 billion. The present world population is estimated at 5.7 billion. Every four days the worl

population increases byone million.
Fertility falls as incomes rise, education spreads, and

hlll

improves. Thus development is the best contraceptive development itself may not be possible if the present
numbers continues.
The  rich get richer, and the	r beget	·1	which
condemns them to remain poo e ildre		ot mean more workers, merely mo	e ith21J.k. It is not suggested that human b  s  trea  · e cattle and compulsorily sterilised. Ff('it. th'! is no :	ive to voluntary
family planning w ·th ducin ent of coercion. The choice is re	tween	of population and perpetuation of pove  .
    The pop n o India	ated to be 920 million today- mor a theent· e p lations of Africa and South America put	er. No  familiar with the conditions in India would doubt , ,-r,,--nope of the people would die in their hungry hutmen nless population control is given topmost priorityr.-\,.
    For the f	in human history we see a transcending concern - th val nojutst of the people but of the planet. We haveun totake a holistic view of the very basis of our existen nvironmental problem does not necessarily signal our de	it is our passport for the future. The emerging new wor on hasushered in the Era of Responsibility.It is a holistic view ...,ecological view, seeing the world as an integrated whole rather than a dissociated collection of parts.
    Industry has a most crucial role to play in this new Era of Responsibility. What a transformation would be effected if more

40	HORNBILL

businessmen shared the view of the Chairman of Du Pont, Mr Edgar S. Woolard who, five years ago, declared himself to be the Company's "Chief Environmental Officer". He said, "Our continued existence as a leading manufacturer requires that we excel in environmental performance."
    Of all the statements made by Margaret Thatcher during the years of her Prime Ministership, none has passed so decisively into the current coin of English usage as her felicitous words: "No generation has a freehold on this earth. All we have is a life tenancy
- with a full repairing lease". In the words of Mr Lester Brown, "We have not inherited this earth from our forefathers; we hav borrowed it from our children."



Understanding the text	•
1. Locate the lines in the te	ppo	'The Ailing
Planet'.	'-'. V
2. What does the notice £e	cl's most	a	erous animal' at a cage in the zoo a L mbia, .
3H.ow are the eart	·	ipal bi	ystems being depleted?
4. Why does the author ver th4h wth of world population is one of the s@st factors dist ng thefuture of human society?

Talking about '?txt	¦

Discuss in groups €:!)ur.
1. Laws are n espected norenforced in India.
2. "Are w o leave our successors a scorched planet of advancing
dese1'. overished landscapes and an ailing environment?"
3. 	not inherited this earth from our forefathers; we have ed it from our children".
4. 	problems of overpopulation that directly affect our everyday life.





THE AILING PLANET: THE GREEN MOVEMENT'S ROLE	41

Thinking about language	¦
The phrase 'inter alia' meaning 'among other things' is one of the many Latin expressions commonly used in English.
Find out what these Latin phrases mean.
1. prima facie
2. ad hoc
3. in camera
4. ad infinitum
5. mutatis mutandis
6. caveat
7. tabula rasa

Working with wor-ds
I. Locate t e following ph a	e connotat10n.

.§'
te t	udy their

1. gripped the imaginytm'IIIIIIII	... '-"""
2. dawned upon
3. ushered  in	.._
4. passed into c coin ./
5. passpo  he future	'
II. The words · ·  'dawn·. er', 'coin', 'passport' have a literal as well as a  urative g. Write pairs of sentences using each word in the l s well as the figurative sense.

Thingst O
1. Make &sto highlight the importance of the Green Movement.
2. Mai	a record of the  trees cut down and  the  parks
, ed inyour area, or any other act that violates the nment. Write to newspapers reporting on any such acts disturb you.

42	HORNBILL

---Notes---

Understanding the text	¦
• Environmental issues
• Social issues

Talking about the text	¦
• Contemporary issues
• Envisioning the future

Thinking about language	¦
Latin expressions commonly used
Working with words ¦	r
• Connotations	"	'-. ,_.
• Finding literal and figura/	s
Things to do  •	'-.'V
environment	?X
Ma ing children awa e	fepons" wards the
(c)
'Oe
"'o
O"
"



















When did my childhood go?
Was it the day I ceased to be eleven,
Was it the time I realised that Hell and Heaven, Could not be found in Geography,

'Cr>J

And therefore could not be,	r "'- ....
Was that the day!	"	•	./
When did my childhoo
Was it the time I realise	u ts'" althley seemed to b
They talked of l v	l ache ve, Budtindoatct		gly,	f> ;('
Was that the day!
When di@hildho'I'> ?
Was it when I fo	nd wraealsly mine, To use whichever		choose,
Producing th hts hatwere not those of other people But my oy., mine alone
Was that t y!

   my childhood go? to some forgotten place,
hidden in an infant's face, all I know.

44	HORNBILL

Think it out	¦
1. Identify the stanza that talks of each of the following. individuality	rationalism	hypocrisy

2. What according to the poem is involved in the process of

growing up?

::: :ic e0

Understanding  the  poem	•	.;,,,,. 9'
Questions are based on	,	"''
• Thematic comprehension


• Reflection on theme

e 'Q. 'V

• Poetic senstb!lity

(c)
'Oe
"'o
O"

'-J'

"


