
















The Portrait of a Lady
A Photograph
awe're Not Afraid to Die ...	We Can All Be Together"
Discovering Tut: the SaoL ue

11.e Voice of the	e'Q The Ailing et: the cCn Movement le
Childhood	'O
TheAdve
Sill Ro
Fat:,.Oson












Effective reading is rece1V1ng /ram others	X,.
their ideas and  feelings.




v"J
,e'Q.
(c)	e
'O
0
Effectiv?? involves undQ:ndingthe text g about the text
thinbing about language worl- ing with words noticing form and patterns.







I. Tk Porf11.1if

11072CH01


K._lu11h.Yv' d- 01111t

Notice these expressions in the text.	r>
Infer their meaning from the context.	'C,/

the thought was almost revolting	aeiitable bedlam  ott,?ngs
an expanse of pure white serenity	f v	us rebu .,..,_.J,,.
a turning-point	Gv t	a  ing ski'-	clilapidated

MY grandmother, l				rybo }\		;Qimother, was an old woman. She had b						an				ed for the twenty years that I had		k			her. People		id that she had once been young and p nd ha				nhaadhusband, but that was hard to believe. My: gjiiiiiiJ'llll.ill'lller's portrait hung above the mantelpiece in the d		wi g room. He wore a big turban and loose-fitting clothes. H			long, white beard covered the best part of his chest			he looked at least a hundred years old. He did not lo1)lort of person who would have a wife or children.				lo d asif he could only have lots and lots of grandc i					As for my grandmother being young and pretty, the th			t was almost revolting. She often told us of the ga	used to play as a child. That seemed quite absurd an <!ignified onherpart and we treated it like the  fables of the  Prophets she used to tell us.
   She had always been short and fat and slightly bent. Her face was a criss-cross of wrinkles running from everywhere to everywhere. No, we were certain she had always been as we had

4	HORNBILL

known her. Old, so terribly old that she could not have grown older, and had stayed at the same age for twenty years. She could never have been pretty; but she was always beautiful. She hobbled about the house in spotless white with one hand resting on her waist to balance her stoop and the other telling the beads of her rosary. Her silver locks were scattered untidily over her pale, puckered face, and her lips constantly moved in inaudible prayer. Yes, she was beautiful. She was like the winter landscape in the mountains, an expanse of pure white serenity breathing peace and contentment.
   My grandmother and I were good friends. My parents left with her when they went to live in the city and we were constant
together. She used to wake me up in the morning and get,_.-._,.,. ready for school. She said her morning prayer in a monot i- ­ sing-song while she bathed and dressed me in the·...-.-.tPII_,,
would listen and get to know it b art; I listene	a se I loved her voice but never bothere	earn it.  i\iil!	 would
fetch my wooden slate which a	a rea,		ed and plastered with yellow chalk ti	e rthe ·	t and a red
pen, tie them all in a bun l	h		d 't to			er a breakfast of a thick, stale chapatti	th a ·		e butt	a	sugar spread on
it, we went to schoo .	c  · ed se	ale chapattis with

her for the village d
My grandmother	w ys

;cool with me because

the school wa ached toth: t le. Thperiest taught us the alphabet  d e morn·  pr er. While the children sat in rows on eithe	of the		dah singing the alphabet or the prayer in a chorus,			dmother sat inside reading the scriptures. When we u.,,._., ,oth finished, we would walk back together. This i		evi age dogs would meet us at the temple door. They fo		 s to our home growling and fighting with each other for  e  apattis we threw to them.
   When  parents were comfortably settled in the city, they sent for	waasturning-point in our friendship. Although we d esame room, my grandmother no longer came to sc ol · me. I used to go to an English school in a motor bus.  ere were no dogs in the streets and she took to feeding sparrows in the courtyard of our city house.
   As the years rolled by we saw less of each other. For some time she continued to wake me up and get me ready for school. When I came back she would ask me what the teacher had





THE PORTRAIT OF A LADY	5

taught me. I would tell her English words and little things of western science and learning, the law of gravity, Archimedes' Principle, the world being round, etc. This made her unhappy. She could not help me with my lessons. She did not believe in the things they taught at the English school and was distressed that there was no teaching about God and the scriptures. One day I announced that we were being given music lessons. She was very disturbed. To her music had lewd associations. It was the monopoly of harlots and beggars and not meant for gentlefolk. She said nothing but her silence meant disapproval. She rarely talked to me after that.
   When I went up to University, I was given a room of my o The common link of friendship was snapped. My grandm accepted her seclusion with resignation. She rarely le	e spinning-wheel to talk to anyone. From sunrise to		e
sat by her wheel spinning and re?S· ng prayers. ,.N the afternoon she relaxed for a while   ed the s1'\._rli  . While she sat in the verandah brea   th br ad ?1' tle bits, hundreds of little birds collec	n  her	·  a veritable
bedlam of chirrupings.e  c e an e donherlegs, others on her shoulders.  ome   n sat   h  liead. She smiled
but never shooed th a Itu e	the happiest half­ hour of the day for
   When I decided t o roa			r studies, I was sure my grandmot uld eups I uld be away for five years, and at her ag  n  ould e  rte . Butmygrandmother could. She was not	senti			. She came to leave me at the railway station but			k or show any emotion. Her lips moved in prayer, her was lost in prayer. Her fingers were busy telling the		of her rosary. Silently she kissed my forehead, and¥ ft I cherished the moist imprint as perhaps the last sign o sical contact between us.
   But t was nost oA. fter five years I came back home and was me  M at the station. She did not look a day older. She
sti l a	time for words, and while she clasped me in her ar  I  uld hear her reciting her prayers. Even on the first day of m  rival, her happiest moments were with her sparrows whom she fed longer and with frivolous rebukes.
   In the evening a change came over her. She did not pray. She collected the women of the neighbourhood, got an old drum and started to sing. For several hours she thumped the sagging

6	HORNBILL

skins of the dilapidated drum and sang of the home-coming of warriors. We had to persuade her to stop to avoid overstraining. That was the first time since I had known her that she did not pray.
   The next morning she was taken ill. It was a mild fever and the doctor told us that it would go. But my grandmother thought differently. She told us that her end was near. She said that, since only a few hours before the close of the last chapter of her life she had omitted to pray, she was not going to waste any more time talking to us.
   We protested. But she ignored our protests. She laypeacefuh in bed  praying and telling her beads. Even before we cou suspect, her lips stopped moving and the rosary fell fro <\ lifeless fingers. A peaceful pallor spread on her face and we
that she was dead.
   We lifted her off the bed and, s customarye.R?e'l' on the ground and covered her with a  hroud.		hours of mourning we left her alone	ak' arran	s for her funeral. In the evening we we  o  r r om ' dsetretcher
to take her to be cremated.	s		was		nd haldither room and verandah wit	ab		of go en ·ght. We stopped half-way in the cou??? er the?	hand inherroom
right up to where		·		wrapped in the red shroud, thousands o	a rows		ed on the floor. There

was no chirru ·	. W1 fetched some
 
e felt sor	o		he birds and my mother for th	. S		broke it into little crumbs,

the way my g other  e toa, ndthrew it to them. The sparrows took no n ·		e bread. When we carried my grandmother's corpse	ey flew away quietly. Next morning the sweeper swepoe bread crumbs into the dustbin.


Und?anding the text  ¦
Me
1. The three phases of the author's relationship with his grandmother before he left the country to study abroad.
2. Three reasons why the author's grandmother was disturbed when he started going to the city school.






THE PORTRAIT OF A LADY	7

3. Three ways in which the author's grandmother spent her days after he grew up.
4. The odd way in which the author's grandmother behaved just before she died.
5. The way in which the sparrows expressed their sorrow when the author's grandmother died.

Talking about the text	¦
Talk to your partner about the following.
1. The author's grandmother was a religious person. What are t different ways in which we come to know this?
2. Describe the changing relationship between the author arll'>i:
grandmother. Did their feelings for each other chang?"'C:7

3. Would you agree that the author's g a	 mother was a in character? If yes, give instance	t show thi

sl'rong

4. Have you known someone likeuth	'sgran	? Do you feel the same sense of loss	ar o		om yohauve
loved and lost?	V.	? V
Thinking

1. 
while talki	o	ch other?
2. Which lang	o you u p.Ik toelderly relatives in your family?
3. How would you sa	ted drum' in your language?
4. Can you think of a s r apoem in your language that talks of homecoming?

Worki	words	¦

I. Notio:	following uses of the word 'tell' in the text. r fingers were busy telling the beads of her rosary.
 :ould tell her English words and little things of Western science and learning.
3. At her age one could never tell.
4. She told us that her end was near.

8	HORNBILL

Given below are four different senses of the word 'tell'. Match the meanings to the uses listed above.
1. make something known to someone in spoken or written words
2. count while reciting
3. be sure
4. give information to somebody

II. Notice the different senses of the word 'take'.
1. to take to something: to begin  to do something as a habit
2. to take ill: to suddenly become ill
Locate these phrases in the text and notice the way they a used.
III. The word 'hobble' means to walk with difficulty becau e and feet are in bad condition.
Tick the words in the box below that	refer to a	hlking.


haggle wriggle


Noticing for

shuffle


e'Q.


slog

Notice the for	verbs italici n these sentences.
1. My grandm as anman. Shheabdeen old and wrinkled for the twenty year  k own her. People said that she had once been young an  e  and had even had a husband, but that was hard to be1K_
2. When we b  inished we would walk back together.
3. When I ca ck shweould ask me what the teacher had
taugh1'{e.
4. It w	st time since I had known her that she did not pray.
5. ?.).Jwas setting and had lit her room and verandah with a ld	light.
These	e examples of the past perfect forms of verbs. When we recount things in the distant past we use this form.






THE PORTRAIT OF A LADY	9

Things to do ¦
Talk with your family members about elderly people who you have been intimately connected with and who are not there with you now. Write a short description of someone you liked a lot.

---Notes---
Understanding the text  •
The tasks cover the entire text and help in summarising the vario phases of the autobiographical account and are based on the c presented.
• Ask the students to read the text silently, paragraph by			, and get a quick oral feedback on wh e main point	c are. For example: Paral-description of    dmother a•d		ther's
photograph.	'
• At the end of the unit ask s e	nsw.	¥,prehension

- village school	.V
-  city school
- unlve.-slty
Talking abo text	•

'e;;Q

Peer interactio t tsse e.ecessary before students engage in writing tasks. The que on raised in this section elicit subjective responses to the facts in th	and also open up possibilities for relating the events to the rel"'(s own life and establish the universality of the kind of relation feelings described in the text.

Thinking out language  ¦
The que?Xre tryto:
• m?.Wreader visualise the language that must have been used b	e uthor and his grandmother
• thin  about their ownhome language

10	HORNBILL

• find equivalents in their language for English phrases
• relate to songs with emotional import in their own language.

Working with words  •
Highlight different uses of common words like 'tell' and 'take'; words used for different ways of walking; and semantically-related word groups. You could add to the items by using the dictionary for

vocabulary enrichment.

Noticing form	•
Make students notice the use of the past perfect form of the verb

tho

frequently appear in the text to recount the remote past. You cou practise the form with other examples.

Things to do  ¦
Relating the topic of the text to the rea	real-life ex•e	iting
about a person who one holds <lea?	,
v"J
,e'Q.
(c)	e
'O
"'o

"



















The cardboard shows me how it was When the two girl cousins went paddling,
Each one holding one of my mother's hands,	?'C/
And she the big girl -	some twelv=iY.rs or so.
All three stood still to smile throu	eir hair ?
At the uncle with the camera.A t		ce',"	./ My mother's, that was befo e	n.	'
And the sea, which appear	o	a	chan	e  ,
Washed their terribly tra	e	t.
Some twenty -	thir -...		s la er She'd laugh at the s	t. "Se
And Dolly," s(c)e' say,	nd loo?l		hey Dressed us £		e beach." The	holiday Was her past,	·		is herhter. Both wry
With the laboured e?Y.,L

Now she's been d  n y asmany years As that girl liv!!.  of this circumstance There is nothi  t  ay at all.
Its silenc c  .
0
In	meanings of the following words from the context.
¦ paddling	transient
¦
Now look up the dictionary to see if your inference is right.

12	HORNBILL

Think it out	¦
1. What does the word 'cardboard' denote in the poem? Why has this word been used?
2. What has the camera captured?
3. What has not changed over the years? Does this suggest something to you?
4. The poet's mother laughed at the snapshot. What did this laugh indicate?
5. is the meaning of the line "Both wry with the laboured ease
6. What does "this circumstance" refer to?	V
7. The three stanzas depict three different phases. What are t



-No

Poems are included  to @?udentS..s?ty to literary
writing and to appre i e	yth	and s	rns inlanguage. Follow these steps:
• Read the poem al		ce wi!t	udents looking at the poem. As@t	m a fe	gener g ns.
• Re-read t	po		with the stud	ts looking at the poem. Ask a few more		ons to c e	comprehension.
• Ask students to re	fflllWJ""1"nsilently and answer the questions given, first orally a		n in writing.
• The poem .?Qraph'is placed after 'The Portrait of a Lady'
becamyf th'Mematic relation between the two.
• The& · nsseek to examine factual and inferential com re	nsion, establish empathy and draw attention to the
of the poem and choice of words.


