
1107ZCH08


Notice these expressions in the text.	eo
Infer their meaning from the context.	·



ducking back manoeuvres billowed

, x esr  own



A FLAWLESS half- 00-ivc.u.vd inJue skotnyhmorneing
we said our goo	xtende	cloud like long French
loaves glowed pin	as the	rged to splash the distant
mount	with a rose-tin  d blush. Now that we were leaving

Ravu,	said sh	1
Oneeven	d told he ·
 
te	to give me a farewell present. gh Daniel that I was heading towards

Mount Kailash t	e kora, and she'd said that I ought to get some warm  c thes. After ducking back into her tent, she emerge rryin oneof the long-sleeved sheepskin coats that all t en ore. Tsetan sized me up as we clambered into his car.   ,   ," he declared, "drokba, sir."
   W, t o	short cut to get off the Changtang. Tsetan knew a rou	at would take us south-west, almost directly towards ailash. It involved crossing several fairly high mountain
 , he said. "But no problem, sir", he assured us, "if there snow." What was the likelihood of that I asked. "Not ng, sir, until we get there."
   From the gently rolling hills of Ravu, the short cut took us across vast open plains with nothing in them except a few gazelles





SILK ROAD	75

76	HORNBILL

dog would make chase for a hundred metres or so before easing off, having seen us off the property. It wasn't difficult to understand why ferocious Tibetan mastiffs became popular in China's imperial courts as hunting dogs, brought along the Silk Road in ancient times as tribute from Tibet.
   By now we could see snow-capped mountains gathering on the horizon. We entered a valley where the river was wide and mostly clogged with ice, brilliant white and glinting in the sunshine. Thetrail hugged its bank, twisting with the meanders as we gradually gained height and the valley sides closed in.
The  turns became sharper and the ride bumpier, Tseta
now in third gear as we continued to climb. The track away from the icy river, labouring through steeper slope t
sported big rocks daubed with patches of bright or	· . Beneath the rocks, hunks of w clung on in			ar- permanent shade. I felt the pr   re buildin&u  i		ears,
held my nose, snorted and e	eWmg .cl round
another tight bend and Ts	pped. He llla pened his door and jumped out o ·   t befor i edwhat was
going on. "Snow," sa 'd ·	e too ¥   vehicle, letting in a breath of cold   as li'  id so.
   A swathe o t e ite tuff la		the track in front of us, stretching		1fteen me s efore it petered out and the dirt trail re	d. The	:C  tinued on either side of
us, smoothing the brupt he upslope side. The bank was too or ouvrehiclecale, sothere was no way round the sno	h. I joi aniel asTsetan stepped on to the encruste  ow and b n slither and slide forward, stamping his foot from tim		o ascertain howsturdy it was. I looked at my wristwatch.	ere at 5,210 metres above sea level.
   The sno dn't ooktoodeep to me, but the danger wasn't its dept ie said, so much as its icy top layer. "If we slip off, the car	1		rn over," he suggested, as we saw Tsetan grab ha&ls o		irtandfling them across the frozen surface. We bot	·tc ed in and, when the snow was spread with soil, Daniel ed out of the vehicle to lighten Tsetan's load. He backed
 d drove towards the dirty snow, eased the car on to its icy face and slowly drove its length without apparent difficulty. Ten minutes later, we stopped at another blockage. "Not good, sir," Tsetan announced as he jumped out again to survey the scene. This time he decided to try and drive round the snow.





SILK ROAD	77

Theslope was steep and studded with major rocks, but somehow Tsetan negotiated them, his four-wheel drive vehicle lurching from one obstacle to the next. In so doing he cut off one of the hairpin bends, regaining the trail further up where the snow had not drifted.
   I checked my watch again as we continued to climb in the bright sunshine. We crept past 5,400 metres and my head began to throb horribly. I took gulps from my water bottle, which is supposed to help a rapid ascent.
   We finally reached the top of the pass at 5,515 metres. It was marked by a large cairn of rocks festooned with white silk scarves and ragged prayer flags. We all took a turn round the cairn, in a clockwise direction as is the tradition, and Tsetan checked the
tyres on his vehicle. He stopped at the petrol tank and p "-/ unscrewed the top, which emitted l		dhiss. The 1 atmospheric pressure was allowing the f	to expand. I so dangerous to me. "Maybe, sir," Tset			"but n @	."
My headache soon cleared as	red down lie,ther
side of the pass. It was two o'c o he time	ed for lunch. We ate hot noodles i ·	1 g canS!a ¥art of a workcamp erected besid  a ctr   alt  lak   T   plateau is
pockmarked with salt s nd ackish , estiges of the Tethys Ocean which b e		et befor e reat continental collision that lifted it	. This 'a    hive of activity,
men with pickaxes and s	vels tr4i ck anfdorth in their long sheepsk o ts andsalt- rusted boots. All wore sunglasses ag ·				e glare steady stream of blue trucks emerged from t		inct ·ngl		1t lake laden with piles of salt. By late afternoon						ached the small town of Hor, back on the main east-w			ghway that followed the old trade route from Lhasaslashmir. Daniel, who was returning to Lhasa, found a ·n		truck so Tsetan and I bade him farewell outside a tyre-	ai				 op. We had suffered two punctures in quick succ ·ono		he drive down from the salt lake and Tsetan was eager	a e them fixed since they left him with no spares.
Besides""'		cond tyre he'd changed had been replaced by as  smooth as my bald head.
or  as a grim, miserable place. There was no vegetation
what ever, just dust and rocks, liberally scattered with years of accumulated refuse, which was unfortunate given that the town sat on the shore of Lake Manasarovar, Tibet's most

78	HORNBILL

venerated stretch of water. Ancient Hindu and Buddhist cosmology pinpoints Manasarovar as the source of four great Indian rivers: the Indus, the Ganges, the Sutlej and the Brahmaputra. Actually only the Sutlej flows from the lake, but the headwaters of the others all rise nearby on the flanks of Mount Kailash. We were within striking distance of the great mountain and I was eager to forge ahead.
   But I had to wait. Tsetan told me to go and drink some tea in Hor's only cafe which, like all the other buildings in town, was constructed from badly painted concrete and had three brokeo windows. The good view of the lake through one of them helpe to compensate for the draught.
   I was  served by a Chinese youth in military unifor c:' spread the grease around on my table with a filth bringing me a glass aryd a thermo	f tea.
   Half an hour later, Tsetan ·eved me f	litary confinement and we drove p a more1',. rubbish westwards out of town towa s   nt Kailasli.-.._,
   My experience in Ho	s a star	to accounts
I'd read of earlier	er ' firsti£ ¥ers with Lake Manasarovar. Ekai  awa   i, a J  an  e monk who had
arrived there in 0 wasomov			sanctity of the lake that he burst · o	. A cou e		ars later, the hallowed waters had a si  ·   fect on	in, a Swede who wasn't
prone to sentimen  1 outb
It w k bythteimwfeinally left again and after
10.30	drew tsi egauest house in Darchen for what tur out to b		her troubled night. Kicking around in the open-air	ump that passed for the town of Hor had set off my co¥ce more, though if truth be told it had never quiteS:peared with my herbal tea. Oneof my nostrils was blo g  anadsI lay down to sleep, I wasn't convinced that th  h  ould provide me with sufficient oxygen. My wa ol  eI was at 4,760 metres. It wasn't much higher tha  avu, and there I'd been gasping for oxygen several times
 ·	1ght. I'd grown accustomed to these nocturnal bances bynow, but they still scared me.
   Tired and hungry, I started breathing through my mouth. ter a while, I switched to single-nostril power which seemed to be admitting enough oxygen but, just as I was drifting off, I woke up abruptly. Something was wrong. My chest felt






SILK ROAD	79

strangely heavy and I sat up, a movement that cleared my nasal passages almost instantly and relieved the feeling in my chest. Curious, I thought.
   I lay back down and tried again. Same result. I was on the point of disappearing into the land of nod when something told me not to. It must have been those emergency electrical impulses again, but this was not the same as on previous occasions. This time, I wasn't gasping for breath, I was simply not allowed to go to sleep.
   Sitting up once more immediately made me feel better. I could breathe freely and my chest felt fine. But as soon as I lay down, my sinuses filled and my chest was odd. I tried propping myself upright against the wall, but now I couldn't manage to relax enough to drop off. I couldn't put my finger on the r a o , but I was afraid to go to sleep. A lit le	oice inside me saying that if I did I might never wa		again. S I
awake all night.	'-	-	..,.
Tsetan took me to the Darchen	colle the  liill ng
morning. The medical college				n was	a		ooked like a monastery from the ou	·	·t	a very s0o ·		that led
into a large courtyard. We	d t	onsulti	which was
dark and cold and occ ·   a ibetan   wore none of the paraphernalia t		n expect . o white coat, he looked like any other	'th a t	over and a woolly hat. When I explained m  leeples 1lims andmy sudden
aversion to lyi , hsehot mew questions while feeling the veins in m  ·  .
"It's a cold,"    aid finaH	ugh Tsetan. "A cold and the
effects of altitude. I'll	mething for it."
   I asked him if he thou d recover enough to be able to do the kora. "Oh yes," aid, "you'll be fine."
I walked ou o t e   dical college clutching a brown envelope
stuffed with fi	ewosf paper. I had a five-day course of Tibetan m · ich I started right away. I opened an after­ breakfast ..,ca .u ..o,""e and found it contained a brown powder that I had t a	th hot water. It tasted just like cinnamon. The con t   thelunchtime and bedtime packages were less ob u identifiable. Both contained small, spherical brown pelle They looked suspiciously like sheep dung, but of course I took them. That night, after my first full day's course, I slept very soundly. Like a log, not a dead man.

80	HORNBILL

   Once he saw that I was going to live Tsetan left me, to return to Lhasa. As a Buddhist, he told me, he knew that it didn't really matter if I passed away, but he thought it would be bad for business.
   Darchen didn't look so horrible after a good night's sleep. It was still dusty, partially derelict and punctuated by heaps of rubble and refuse, but the sun shone brilliantly in a clear blue sky and the outlook across the plain to the south gave me a vision of the Himalayas, commanded by a huge, snow-capped mountain, Gurla Mandhata, with just a wisp of cloud suspended over its
The	town had a couple of rudimentary general stores selli
Chinese cigarettes, soap and other basic provisions, as w the usual strings of prayer flags. In front of one, men gat e
in the afternoon for a game of pool, the battered t	· supremely incongruous in the r,		air, while ne w		en washed their long hair in the ic	ater of a n ro		that
babbled down past my	Darch  "'"	edand
unhurried_ bu , for me, it c	·	signific	¥ack. There
were no p1lgnms.	"'
   I'd been told that	e· lit of he'¥age season, the town was bustling  ith   tors.	y  rought their own
accommodatio ,	in the se			round its edges as they set up th · t s ich s ii		wn on to the plain. I'd timed my arriva: o  e begin	eseason, but it seemed
I was too early.
  One oon I sat pond g myoptions over a glass of tea in Dare  ' nly cafe r alittle consideration, I concluded they wer  erely lim . learly I hadn't made much progress with my self-he	me on positive thinking.
   In my defen: adn't been easy with all my sleeping difficulties however I looked at it, I could only wait. The pilgrima ·		swell-trodden, but I didn't fancy doing it alone. The kor		as		asonal because parts of the route were liable to blo e b		now. I had no idea whether or not the snow had clea'	,	ut I wasn't encouraged by the chunks of dirty ice that g to the banks of Darchen's brook. Since Tsetan had
 adn't come across anyone in Darchen with enough English answer even this most basic question.
   Until, that is, I met Norbu. The cafe was small, dark and cavernous, with a long metal stove that ran down the middle. The walls and ceiling were wreathed in sheets of multi-coloured





SILK ROAD	81

plastic, of the striped variety- broad blue, red and white-that is made into stout, voluminous shopping bags sold all over China, and in many other countries of Asia as well as Europe. As such, plastic must rate as oneof China's most successful exports along the Silk Road today.
   The cafe had a single window beside which I'd taken up position so that I could see the pages of my notebook. I'd also brought a novel with me to help pass the time.
   Norbu saw my book when he came in and asked with a gesture if he could sit opposite me at my rickety table. "You English?" he enquired, after he'd ordered tea. I told him I was, and we struck up a conversation.
I didn't think he was from those parts because he was wearing
a windcheater and metal-rimmed spectacles of a Western s "-/ He was Tibetan, he told me, but worked in	eijing at the Chin	e Academy of Social Sciences, in the Instit	e of Ethnic Liter .
I assumed he was on some sort of fie	o	.		• '-.-:- "Yes and no," he said. "I have co e		do		e kora.	art
jumped. Norbu had been writ ·		a	e 1c pa			t the Kailash kora and its importan	·  va		us wo	f	uddhist

literature for many years, h d	uth:e
done it himself.

ractually

   When the time came	tell hi w t brought me to Darchen, his eyes lit u ould be		esaid excitedly. "Two academics whoL cape		eibrary." Perhaps my positive-thi	strategy was  rlung after all.
   My initial	meetin orbu, who was also staying in the guest hm;s	 tempe,_.,,.,,-,"' the realisation that he was almost as ill-equipped i.- -r hpeilgrimage. He kept telling me how fat he was and w rd it was going to be. "Very high up," he kept reminding  , "so tiresome to walk." He wasn't really a practisi uddhist, it transpired, but he had
enthusiasm anVi ,of course, Tibetan.
Although I'd' inally envisaged making the trek in the
company dlievout believers, on reflection I decided that perhaps
Norbu	out	to be the	ideal companion.  He suggested
we hire om yaks to carry our luggage, which I interpreted as a goo , ndhehandointention of prostrating himself all rou  t  mountain. "Not possible," he cried, collapsing across the ta le in hysterical laughter. It wasn't his style, and anyway his tummy was too big.


82	HORNBILL

Understanding the text	¦
I. Give reasons for the following statements.
1. The article has been titled 'Silk Road.'
2. Tibetan mastiffs were popular in China's imperial courts.
3. Theauthor's experience at Hor was in stark contrast to earlier accounts of the place.
4. The author was disappointed with Darchen.
5. The author thought that his positive thinking strategy worke well after all.
II. Briefly comment on	(2,
1. The purpose of the author's jo rney to Mount Kai
2. The author's physical condi·	in Darchen?	(>"	...,
3. The	author's meeting wit	orS	'-..'._,
4. Tsetan's supportto e	urin h	-
5"A.s a Buddhist, he	d	e, e knew tH	it	n't really matter
T  :•:edawa	t ug	ad fo, business"


Discuss n ou
1. The	e behavi of-folk.
2. !he r	s why pe	"llingly undergo the travails of difficult
Journeys.	"4
3. The accounts	places in legends and the reality.

Th	out language	¦
1. ice thkeind of English Tsetan uses while talking to the author. yotuhink he picked it up?
at dtohfolloweing utterances indicate?
(i) "I told her, through Daniel ..."
"	..., (ii) "It's a cold," he said finally through Tsetan.






SILK ROAD	83

3.  Guess the meaning of the following words.

kora	drokba	kyang

In which language are these words found?

Working with words	¦
1. The narrative has many phrases to describe the scenic beauty of the mountainside like:
   A flawless half-moon floated in a perfect blue sky. Scan the text to locate other such picturesque phrases.
2. Explain the use of the adjectives in the following phrases.	'(..I

( ; : :!:::::t:rs		•	
(iii) rickety table	;
(iv) hairpin bend
Noticing form	¦  G	.("..\::S.
L i.!':.:: o_::s; o;;, :i :seve =-t ot :t::i::r
the narrative
2. Notice this c	t		ion:	e ger to have them fixed. Write five sentence		a simila ture.

Things to do
"The plateau is p k with salt flats and brackish lakes, vestiges of the Tethys Oce h bordered Tibet before the continental collision that lifted i ar
Given belo	 ·		n extract from an account of the Tethys Ocean downloa	o	the Internet. Go online, key in Tethys Ocean in Google '..liill -""W.11-"-will find exhaustive information on this geological event.
so consult an encyclopedia.
    y, India, Indonesia and the Indian Ocean cover the area once occupied by the Tethys Ocean. Turkey, Iraq, and Tibet sit on the land once known as Cimmeria. Most of the floor of the Tethys Ocean disappeared under Cimmeria and Laurasia. We

84	HORNBILL

only know that Tethys existed because geologists like Suess have found fossils of ocean creatures in rocks in the Himalayas. So, we know those rocks were underwater, before the Indian continental shelf began pushing upward as it smashed into Cimmeria. We can see similar geologic evidence in Europe, where the movement of Africa raised the Alps.

---Notes---
A travelogue presenting a panoramic view of Mt Kaila.sh.
Understanding the text	n
• Factual comprehension	'CJ
• Author's adventurous experienrhile scaling:hel'...!.. rr in

Talking about the text  ¦	',
:hi::;·:::;ggy c;Qes;;,  V
• English spo	5Z
• Communicati	:wi	stran b
• Gue ·	the meanings	from other languages from
the	tex

Working WI h w r
• Noticing pictur	u	hrases
• Use ofun on  djectives

Noticin ¦
n::•e.of active voice asa contributor to the s1yle of narration


Vi_g information about geological formations from the Internet/ encyclopedia

















I do not understand this child	(2,
Though we have lived together now
In the same house for years. I kno	?	(>"	..,
Nothing of him, so try to build	'-..,._.
Upa	relationship from how			""'' He was when small. Yet h	d	'-.
The seed I spent or so itVe	... '-..
The land is his an o		of	ine? We speak like str.	t ere's 1
Of understanding 1	the air. ./ 'C/
This chil t tomdyesig: Yet what 1	I cann,share.
Silence surrounds		have Him prodigal, retur	g
His father's ho , th omheeknew, Rather tha		n		make and move His world.	o		forgive him too,
Shapyfrom  orrow a new love.
Fa	son, we both must live
l ame globe and the same land, eaks: I cannot understand
lf, why anger grows from grief.
We each put out an empty hand, Longing for something to forgive.

86	HORNBILL

Think it out	¦
1. Does the poem talk of an exclusively personal experience or is it
fairly universal?
2. How is the father's helplessness brought out in the poem?
3. Identify the phrases and lines that indicate distance between father and son.
4. Does the poem have a consistent rhyme scheme?
---Notes---	0
The poem Is autobiographical In nature and describes th
between a father and his son.	-.

Understanding  the poem,	'	"	''"
Questions are based on	'
• the universality of the	p i,i.:scribe
• phrases in the poe	... '-....,..
• rhymesche	'V

(c)'<:>'°'
"o
CV


