



11072CH07








Notice these expressions in the text.
Infer their meaning from the context.	e;
? blow-by-blow account	?	de facto	V"\..
morale booster	as	te	...-
? celegaled lo	 a_:eorendtatc c'"'(	 political acumen		, 0 "'
THE Jijamata Express sG(/ the.P ombay• route considerably faster a t cai - There were no industrial townships ou ·   ne. Th ir  stop, Lonavala, came in 40 minutes. The	ction f   owed was no different
from what he knew. T	train	arjat only briefly and
went on at ev ter speed. It  ared through Kalyan.
   Meanwhil	acing 1"1.of ofessor Gaitonde had arrived at a plan of ac  in Bofl.!.. Indeed, as a historian he felt he should have thought boner. He would go to a big library and browse through hi'¥Y books. That was the surest wayof finding out how t esent state of affairs was reached. He also planned eveny.l\UJ return to Pune and have a long talk with Rajendra Desli e. whowould surely help him understand what had Vppened.
   Th  Muming that in this world there existed someone called dra Deshpande!
 am stopped beyond the long tunnel. It was a small station call arhad. An Anglo-Indian in uniform went through the train checking permits.


The present story is an adapted version. The original text of the story can be consulted on the NCERT website : www.ncert.nic.in
* Now known as Mumbai

46	HORNBILL


   "This is where the British Raj begins. You are going for the first time, I presume?" Khan Sahib asked.
   "Yes." The reply was factually correct. Gangadharpant had not been to this Bombay before. He ventured a question: "And, Khan Sahib, how will you go to Peshawar?"
"This train goes to the Victoria Terminus*. I will take the
Frontier Mail tonight out of Central." "How far does it go? By what route?"
   "Bombay to Delhi, then to Lahore and then Peshawar. A long journey. I will reach Peshawar the day after tomorrow."
 Thereafter, Khan Sahib spoke a lot about his business Gangadharpant was a willing listener. For, in that way, he w able to get some flavour of life in this India that wasso diff Thterain nowpassed through the suburban rail traffi
blue carriages carried the letters, GBMR, on the sid "Greater Bombay Metropolitan	ilway," explt°.-.,	an
Sahib. "See the tiny Union Jack	ed on ea	iage?  A
gentle reminder that we are in	1	h	ritory''
   Thetrain began to slow	e ond·,md stopped
only at its destination,Vicf ·	T min \.. tation looked remarkably neat and cl	.		staff	stly made up of
Anglo-Indians and Par			o	with				1 of British officers. As he emerged		t e s at·,		ngadharpant found himself facing an imp		·n build·	 e	tters on it proclaimed its identity to	who did no		this Bombay landmark:
INDIA	HEADQUARTERS OF
Hr...ii ..,.,DIA COMPANY
Prepared as he was for		shocks, Professor Gaitonde had not expected this. The  In ia Company had been wound up shortly after the eventyf		- at least, that is what history books said. Yet, here it wa t only alive but flourishing. So, history had taken		rum, perhaps before 1857. How and when had it happen	ad to fmd out.
   A			lked along Hornby Road, as it was called, he found a		t set of shops and office buildings. There was no Ha	m House building. Instead, there were Boots and Woolworth departmental stores, imposing offices of Lloyds, Barclays and other British banks, as in a typical high street of a town in England.

* Now known as Chattrapati Shivaji Terminus




THE ADVENTURE	47


   He turned right along Home Street and entered Forbes building.
   "I wish to meet Mr Vinay Gaitonde, please," he said to the English receptionist.
   She searched through the telephone list, the staff list and then through the directory of employees of all the branches of the firm. She shook her head and said, "I am afraid I can't find anyone of that name either here or in any of our branches. Are you sure he works here?"
   This was a blow, not totally unexpected. If he himself were dead in this world, what guarantee had he that his son woul be alive? Indeed, he may not even have been born!
   He thanked the girl politely and came ou . It characteristic of him not to worry about where he would
His main concern was to make his way to the lib		e Asiatic Society to solve the riddle- tory. Gra	q ick lunch at a restaurant, he made hi, to thTeh 7J.
Yes, to his relief, the Town		d house the library. He entered the re	ande  ralist of history
books includinghis v
His five volume	arrived o   ·   ble. He started from
the beginning. Volu on too a ryuptotheperiod of Ashoka, vol o uptoSapta, volume three up to Mohammad  ri nd volu e fou up to the death of Aurangzeb. Up to this peri  story w3 che knew it. The change evidently had occurred in the e.
   Reading volume fi:7e	both ends inwards, Gangadharpant finally converged e precise moment where history had taken a different tu
That page 1	ook described the Battle of Panipat, and it
mentionetVhat t e Marathas won it handsomely. Abdali was routed	was chased back to Kabul by the triumphant Marath. a y led by Sadashivrao Bhau and his nephew, the yo s wasrao.
       book did not go into a blow-by-blow account of the battle itself. Rather, it elaborated in detail its consequences for the power struggle in India. Gangadharpant read through the account avidly. The style of writing was unmistakably his, yet he was reading the account for the first time!

48	HORNBILL


   Their victory in the battle was not only a great morale booster to the Marathas but it also established their supremacy in northern India. The East India Company, which had been watching these developments from the sidelines, got the message and temporarily shelved its expansionist programme.
   For the Peshwas the immediate result was an increase in the influence of Bhausaheb and Vishwasrao who eventfully succeeded his father in 1780 A.D. The trouble-maker, Dadasaheb, was relegated to the background and he eventually retired from state politics.
   To its dismay, the East India Company met its match the new Maratha ruler, Vishwasrao. He and his brothe Madhavrao, combined political acumen with valour{t; systematically expanded their influence all over India Company was reduced to pockets of influence nea	,
Calcutta* and Madrast, just lik · s European lli ,"'the Portuguese and the French.	• '-..-
For political reasons, the P 1 pth	Mughal
regime alive in Delhi. In		ce se dfeacto rulers from Pune wert,	t enou 1'._"¥ecognise the importance of the techn ogic  age da  i  in Europe. They
set up their own ce t				nology. Here, the East India Compa	ano h		tunity to extend its influence. It offered ai nd exp	e were accepted only to make the loca!;res self-suf ·en.
   Thetwen t centu rou ht about further changes inspired by t est. In		oved towards a democracy. By then, the Peshwas	their enterprise and they were gradually replaced b mocratically elected bodies. The Sultanate at D l ·   ·ved even this transition, largely because it wielded no  · uence. The Shahenshah of Delhi was no more than a fig  ead to rubber-stamp the 'recommendations' made by  c-entral parliament.
As	Gangadharpant began to appreciate the India
he l	-Iwt acoauntrsy that had not been subjected to
sla rY r the white man; it had learnt to stand on its feet and knew hat self-respect was. From a position of strength and for purely commercial reasons, it had allowed the British to retain


* Now known as Kolkata
t Now known as Chennai




THE ADVENTURE	49


Bombay as the sole outpost on the subcontinent. That lease was to expire in the year 2001, according to a treaty of 1908.
   Gangadharpant could not help comparing the country he knew with what he was witnessing around him.
   But, at the same time, he felt that his investigations were incomplete. How did the Marathas win the battle? To find the answer he must look for accounts of the battle itself.
   He went through the books and journals before him. At last, among the books he found one that gave him the clue. It was Bhausahebanchi Bakhar.
   Although he seldom relied on the Bakhars for historic evidence, he found them entertaining to read. Sometimes, buri in the graphic but doctored accounts, he could spot the
of truth. He found one now in a three-line account of how"' Vishwasrao had come to being killed:
... And then Vishwasrao guided his   se to the	the
elite troops were fighting and he ta d the		was merciful. A shot brushed past h· e  v n the di	e of a til
(sesame) would have led to hl' Jlllli.   "'
At eight o'clock the liX2 ¥itelyte "Yathe professor
that the library waslo i for lie da . harpant emerged from his thoughts.  o ·   ound  n iced that he was the only reader left in U:i'	nifice	.
"I beg you@ardorr, sir! M.l uest yotuokeep these
books here fo y' setomorrowrning? By the way, when do
you open?"  V
"At eight o'clock, ir:"	brarian smiled. Here was a user
and researcher right   er  is heart.
   As the professgt  etable he shoved some notes into his right pocket. Abs uindedly, healso shoved the Bakhar into his left pocke


He	guest house to stay in and had a frugal meal. He the  s  out for a stroll towards the Azad Maidan.
   Irr he maidan he found a throng moving towards a pandal. So, a lecture was to take place. Force of habit took Professor Gaitonde towards the pandal. The lecture was in progress, although people kept coming and going. But Professor Gaitonde was not looking at the audience. He was staring at the platform

50	HORNBILL


as if mesmerised. There was a table and a chair but the latter was unoccupied.
   The presidential chair unoccupied! The sight stirred him to the depths. Like a piece of iron attracted to a magnet, he swiftly moved towards the chair.
   The speaker stopped in mid-sentence, too shocked to continue. But the audience soon found voice.
"Vacate the chair!"
"This lecture series has no chairperson ..." "Away from the platform, mister!"
"The chair is symbolic, don't you know?"
   What nonsense! Whoever heard of a public lecture without presiding dignitary? Professor Gaitonde went to the mike gave vent to his views. "Ladies and gentlemen, an unch · lecture is like Shakespeare's Hamlet without the	f
Denmark. Let me tell you..."
But	the	audience was in no mo	listen. " \i	othing.
We are sick of remarks from th ·r,	vote o "	s,of long
introductions."	'
"We only want to listen t	e	eake;:;.. \..
"We abolished the ol ust	long	o.. "
"Keep the platfo t	lease
But Gangadhar	the e	eof speaking at 999
meetings and had fa	e Pu	e	eatitsmost hostile. He kept on ta ·.
He soon b  a  a targ or a hower of tomatoes, eggs and
other objects.		he ke		trying valiantly to correct this sacrilege. Finally, th		ce swarmed to the stage to eject him bodily.	.
And, in the	Gangadharpant was nowhere to be seen.


"That i e ttoell, Rajendra. All I know is that I was found in the	aidan in the morning. But I was back in the world I a 1iawirth. Now, where exactly did I spend those two day h n I was absent from here?"
   Rajendra was dumbfounded by the narrative. It took him a while to reply.
   "Professor, before, just prior to your collision with the truck, what were you doing?" Rajendra asked.




THE ADVENTURE	51


   "I was thinking of the catastrophe theory and its implications for history."
"Right! I thought so!" Rajendra smiled.
   "Don't smile smugly. In case you think that it wasjust my mind playing tricks and my imagination running amok, look at this."
   And, triumphantly, Professor Gaitonde produced his vital piece of evidence: a page torn out of a book.
   Rajendra read the text on the printed page and his face underwent a change. Gone was the smile and in its place came a grave expression. He was visibly moved.
   Gangadharpant pressed home his advantage. "I ha inadvertently slipped the Bakharin my pocket as I left the libr.-.,-. ... I discovered my error when I was paying for my meal. intended to return it the next morning. But it seems,i1,.-.,,..i-i	e melee of Azad Maidan, the book wa t; only this tfi		f	age remained. And, luckily for me, the	contains t	· ence."
Rajendra again read the pa de	ribe,d	·	wasrao
narrowly missed the bullet,	o tha !!llil. aken as an omen by the Maratha army,   e the ti	eir favour.
   "Now look at this." G a	pant  o c d his own copy of Bhausahebanchi k ened		elevant page. The account ran thus:
...And then Vishwasr	guided	the melee where the
elite troops w ting, anhdea: t	em. And God expressed His displeas	.	was hi	the	ullet.
   "Professor aito ave given me food for thought. Until I saw this ma ia evidence, I had simply put your experience down an sy.Butfacts can be stranger than fantasies, as I a  b inning to realise."
   "Facts?	the facts? I am dying to know!" Professor Gaitonde


Raj Outioned himtosilence and started pacing the room, obvi s under great mental strain. Finally, he turned around and s id, "Professor Gaitonde, I will try to rationalise your experience on the basis of two scientific theories as known today. Whether I succeed or not in convincing you of the facts, only you can judge - for you have indeed passed through a fantastic experience: or, more correctly, a catastrophic experience!"

52	HORNBILL


   "Please continue, Rajendra! I am all ears," Professor Gaitonde replied. Rajendra continued pacing as he talked.
   "You have heard a lot about the catastrophe theory at that seminar. Let us apply it to the Battle of Panipat. Wars fought face to face on open grounds offer excellent examples of this theory. The Maratha army was facing Abdali's troops on the field of Panipat. There was no great disparity between the latter's troops and the opposing forces. Their armour was comparable. So, a lot depended on the leadership and the morale of the troops. The juncture at which Vishwasrao, the son of and heir to the Peshwa, was killed proved to be the turning point. As histob­ has it, his uncle, Bhausaheb, rushed into the melee and wa never seen again. Whether he was killed in battle or survived not known. But for the troops at that particular moment 1 blow of losing their leaders was crucial. They lost t ·	L
and	fighting spirit. There followedtter rout.
"Exactly, Professor! And what    have sho¥7ll	that
torn page is the course taken e attle, -		e bullet missed Vishwasrao. A crucial v		et	ay. And its effect on the troops was also	site . I d their morale and provided just tha pet				made all the difference," Rajendr ai.
   "Maybe so. Simil r		ents ar e about the Battle of Waterloo, which Na	coulde*iroyn. . Buwte live  in  a
have been' is	r tsahke o eceulation butnotfor reality," Gangadharpa d.	r>.
   "I take issue wit e. Infact, that brings me to my second point which y	y find strange; but please hear me out," Rajendra said.
   Gangadharpa tened expectantly as Rajendra continued. "What do we rft(a reality? We experience it directly with our senses or ire  viainstruments. But is it limited to what we see? Does  h ve other manifestations?
          a ity may not be unique has been found from exp		s on very small systems - of atoms and their con			particles. When dealing with such systems the phy	scovered something startling. The behaviour of these systems cannot be predicted definitively even if all the physical laws governing those systems are known.
   "Take an example. I fire an electron from a source. Where will it go? If I fire a bullet from a gun in a given direction at a given




THE ADVENTURE	53


speed, I know where it will be at a later time. But I cannot make such an assertion for the electron. It may be here, there, anywhere. I can at best quote odds for it being found in a specified location at a specified time."
   "The lack of determinism in quantum theory! Even an ignoramus historian like me has heard of it," Professor Gaitonde said.
   "So, imagine many world pictures. In one world the electron is found here, in another it is over there. In yet another it is in a still different location. Once the observer finds where it is, we know which world we are talking about. But all those alternativ worlds could exist just the same." Rajendra paused to marsh his thoughts.
   "But is there any contact between those many wor& Professor Gaitonde asked.	liC/
   "Yes and no! Imagine two worl for example. ,n tn an electron is orbiting the nucleus of	tom ..." ?
   "Like planets around the su .			a adhar			erjected. "Not quite. We know the c				ect'#,				planet. The electron could be orbiting i			o				la=:ge			er of specified states. These states may u			o ide		i			 world. In state no.l we have the el c o		in		state						r energy. In state no.2 it is in a state				ener					c n make a jump from high to low energy a	s	cl ou									radiation. Or a pulse
of radiation ca ck ouotf ta  o. 2 into state no.l. Such transitions a co mon in mic scopic systems. What if it happened on	rosco c  el?" Rajendra said.
   "I get you! You ar	f'l8. -tlng that I made a transition from one world to another		ack again?" Gangadharpant asked. "Fantastic th h it eems, this is the only explanation I
can offer. My t	i that catastrophic situations offer radically different alter   i   for the world to proceed. It seems that so far as re  is oncerned all alternatives are viable but the observe  perience only one of them at a time.
"By	g a transition, you were able to experience two worlds
al	e at a time. The one you live in now and the one where yo11ent two days. One has the history we know, the other a different history. The separation or bifurcation took place in the Battle of Panipat. You neither travelled to the past norto the future. You were in the present but experiencing a different world. Of course, by the same token there must be many more different worlds arising out of bifurcations at different points of time."

54	HORNBILL


   As Rajendra concluded, Gangadharpant asked the question that was beginning to bother him most. "But why did I make the transition?"
   "If I knew the answer I would solve a great problem. Unfortunately, there are many unsolved questions in science and this is oneof them. But that does not stop me from guessing." Rajendra smiled and proceeded, "You need some interaction to cause a transition. Perhaps, at the time of the collision you were thinking about the catastrophe theory and its role in wars. Maybe you were wondering about the Battle of Panipat. Perhaps, the neurons in your brain acted as a trigger."
   "A good guess. I was indeed wondering what course hi to would have taken if the result of the battle had gone the oth way," Professor Gaitonde said. "That was going to be the to 1 my thousandth presidential address."
   "Now you are in the happy pos ·ti	of recounti u		eal life experience rather than just spe	ting," Raj*n	ghed.
But Gangadharpant was gr ve.	'-. ,-
   "No, Rajendra, my thousan				ss w: n thAzead Maidan when I was so ru			upte . o. he Professor Gaitonde who disappeared		nding · s			on the platform will now never be s sid gat					meeting - I have conveyed my regrets	anisers			Panipat seminar."

Understa(c)ig   tr.5l,;'S.¦
I. Tick the statement re true.
1. The story is"'a	t of real events.
2. The sto	onaparticular historical event.
3. Rajendr hpande wasa historian.
4. Th es mentioned in the story are all imaginary. tory tries to relate history to science.
II. xplain the following statements from the text.
 neither travelled to the past nor the future. You were in the present experiencing a different world."
2. "You have passed through a fantastic experience: or more correctly, a catastrophic experience."
3. Gangadharpant could not help comparing the country he knew	with what he was witnessing around him.




THE ADVENTURE	55


4. "The lack of determinism in quantum theory!"
5. "You need some interaction to cause a transition."

Talking about the text	¦
1. Discuss the following statements in groups of two pairs, each pair in a group taking opposite points of view.
(i) A single event may change the course of the history of a nation.
(ii) Reality is what is directly experienced through the senses.
(iii) The methods of inquiry of history, science and philosopli are similar.
2. (i) The	story is called 'The Adventure'. Compare it wit adventure described in 'We're Not Afraid to Die ...'	'C,/
(ii) Why do you think Professor Ga de decided neve ide
over meetings again?	,	"	?

Thinking about la	•
1. In which language do : :: f!"a nt anKdhan Sahib talked to each other.		angua di Gangadharpant use to talk to the Englis	·onis ?
2. In which language   you t ·	usahebanchi Bakhar was
written?
3. There is m  · of three unities inthestory: the Marathas, the Mughals, e An ns. Which language do you think they used within t r mmunities and while speaking to the other groups?
4. Do you think t e ruled always adopt the language of the ruler?

Worki  th  words	¦
I. O:temthat is closest in meaning to the following phrases.
'tir take issue with
(i) to accept
(ii) to discuss
(iii) to disagree
(iv) to add

56	HORNBILL


2. to give vent to
(i) to express
(ii) to emphasise
(iii) suppress
(iv) dismiss
3. to stand on one's feet
(i) to be physically strong
(ii) to be independent
(iii) to stand erect
(iv) to be successful
4. to be wound up
(i) to become active
(ii) to stop operating
(iii) to be transformed	"	'"	.,/
(iv) to be destroyed
5. to  meet one's matchr	''"V
(i) to meeta	hsa· ·stes
(ii) to meet	nent
(iii) to meet so	one	ble as oneself
(iv) toefeat	'

II. Distinguish  ee	ng pairs of sentences.
1. (i)	He was visi¥wed.
(ii) He	ually impaired.
2. (i)	GiV:i 111	black stripes were used alternately.
(iiV,re ripes could be used or alternatively black ones.
3. team played the two matches successfully.
he team played two matches successively.
The librarian spoke respectfully to the learned scholar.
(ii) You will find the historian and the scientist in the archaeology and natural science sections of the museum respectively.




THE ADVENTURE	57


Noticing form	¦
The story deals with unreal and hypothetical conditions. Some of the sentences used to express this notion are given below:
l.	If I fire a bullet from a gun in a given direction at a given speed, I know where it will be at a later time.
2. If I knew the answer I would solve a great problem.
3. If he himself were dead in this world, what guarantee had he that his son would be alive.
4. What course would history have taken if the battle had gone t other way?
Notice that in an unreal condition, it is clearly expected thn-,i
condition will not be fulfilled.
Thingstodo	¦	9"
I. Read the following		L ,atastr_,,_o ory downloaded from the Internet.	·
Originated by h		mathe t1 ·an, Rene Thom, in the 1960s, c		he then special branch of dynamical sys s theo# ·'G./tu ies and classifies pheno haracterise_d sudden shifts in behaviour arising	mall ch s incircumstances.
Cat	phes a   · urcations between different
equilibria, or f · ttractors. Due to their restricted nature, catastro  s an be classified on the basis of how many contr ara eters are being simultaneously varied. For exa , i here are two controls, then one finds the most co	e, called a 'cusp' catastrophe. If, however, th ar   orethan five controls, there is no cla •fication.
 r""fiir,,.  strophe theory has been applied to a number of
 ent phenomena, such as the stability of ships at sea d their capsizing, bridge collapse, and, with some less
,c;nvincing success, the fight-or-flight behaviour of animals and prison riots.

58	HORNBILL


II. Look up the Internet or an encyclopedia for information on the following theories.
(i) Quantum theory
(ii) Theory of relativity
(iii) Big Bang theory
(iv) Theory of evolution

---Notes---

Understanding the text	¦	X,.
: :; ::i:: ;:::: : :e =:::::1comp,ehenslon
Talking about the text	¦
• Discussing approaches ofvario ·sci ·nes to	r,{e inquiry
hi:: l:::::e:	V	.;:,.
• Inter-community	icat1ilE,on	common languages
• Reference to langua	of differ	·  ip ines
• Political do on anldangua	imposition (discuss)

Workingwith s	¦
• Idiomatic expressio
• Distinction bet	frequently misused word forms: respectively/ respectfull"-, '-J
Noticing fWm	¦
Conditio tences forunreal and hypothetical conditions

Thi do ¦
Finding out about popular scientific theories (real-life reading)


