
z.	11072CH10


SUMMARISING follows note-making. The purpose of note-making is usually for one's own personal reference. If the main points are to be reported we present a summary. It is not as severet> shortened as note-making.
   Summarising is the selection and paraphras ·ng important information of the original source. This · analysing the paragraphs/passage ·n	rder to formul	a: Ian of writing.		?
.		The proc ss of summarising d	Yolve t	ollowed m note-makmg:		'
1. underlining important
2. writing them down,	rid'Wthe vel4ki
3. avoiding examples·,l"'lllillll"'u.tions,A¥on.
   However, inste	omin 'Whe points (changing verbs into nouns), we xpandJh ints into full sentences and link the ing suitabl onnectors. We need to be precise in ou	essio e summary will contain all the main ideas of e o ractice inusing one word for many will help.
For example:	r-\..
• Childreno'-lwintelligence far beyond their age often

turn	tmo

ediocre inadult life.
or

Pre us children often turn out to be mediocre in
'Tfre.
• Hergenius was marked by excellence in the various arts, languages and science.
                       or She was a versatile genius.






SUMMARISING	81

Now read the following text underlining important words as you go along.
Soybeans belong to the legume family. The beans are the seeds of the leguminous soybean plant. They can be grown on a variety of soils and in a wide range of climates. Soybeans are versatile as they can be used as whole beans, soy sprouts, or processed as a variety of food items, such as soy milk, tofu, tempeh, textured vegetable protein, miso, soy sauce, soy oil and margarine, and soy dairy alternatives. They are also used for making candles and bio-diesel.
   Soy is an excellent source of high quality protein; i lowin saturated fats and is cholestrol-free. It is also ri in vitamins, especially Vitamin B complex, minerals asmagnesium, calcium, iron, potassium and c p
also fibres. In recent time it has bee h hly recommended because of its   ity to lowir 1/' elsof
Low Density Lipoprotein (	) ,		bad °'"	ol. The Food and Drug Adminis r			A), h	rmed that foods containing soy pr	e·		e likel		duce the risk
of coronary  heart  dE.	s	
An easy way to t	e so 1  as so lH'll,)1-iow available with
added flavour. So		s not c	t		lactose (milk sugar) and can be drun	ose whl)r?		lergic to normal milk.
To get soymilk, so	eans a"fe/	d inwater, ground and
then strai f yoduon't d thtroueble, you can also make ita - 225	ds).
Now note down the i	points.
• Soybeans are the s	of the soybean plant of the legume family.	r-\,.
• They gro	iety of soils and climates.
• Theyy_e)r{ed invarious forms -	beans, sprouts and a vari	od items.
• The	also used to make candles and bio-diesel.
• re asource of high quality protein, vitamins, minerals
;: {fibres. They are low in fat content and cholesterol. They can lower LDL levels and reduces risk of coronary heart disease.
• Soymilk, lactose-free, is available as flavoured milk and can be drunk by those allergic to ordinary milk and can also be

82	HORNBILL

made at home by soaking the beans, grinding them and straining the water. (111 words)
A summary is usually one-third the length of the original passage. This is about half.
Now think of what we can omit to make the summary more brief as shown below.
The soybean leguminous plant which grows in all kinds of soil and climate yields beans, sprouts and a variety of processed food items and dairy alternatives and is also used to make candles and bio-diesel.
Rich in protein, vitamins, minerals and fibres, it has
low fat and cholesterol content. It lowers LDL levels reduces the risk of coronary heart disease.
   Soymilk which is lactose-free is available as			ed milk and agrees with people a		rgic to ord1 n	ilk. It cabnemade at home by soa	n		rindi		raining
soybean. (90 words)	'"
Try reducing it further to a	7	or ds.
Soybean, a legume,	owin	a va ·	soil and climatic
conditions, yiel s			routs		ariety of food items and is used in	·	cand es	-diesel.
Rich in protein,  ·tamins  · e   and fibres, it is low in
cholestero at. tlowers	evels and reduces the risk of corona  e t disea  Soy ilk, lactose-free, is available flavoured a  aken bv..,.,. .....v, le allergic to milk. It can also be made at home. ( 
Notice that we have ph es in apposition: 'a legume', between commas; presentciples: 'growing' to effect reduction. Instead of 'it is rich in.Vw ve used 'rich in...' and postponed the main verb in th\?nt . Almost all the main points have been covered.

Read trs!:,-- elow and summarise it.
Green Sahara
The Great Desert Where Hippos Once Wallowed
The Sahara sets a standard for dry land. It's the world's largest desert. Relative humidity can drop into the low single digits. There are places where it rains only about once a






SUMMARISING	83

century. There are people who reach the end of their lives without ever seeing water come from the sky.
   Yet beneath the Sahara are vast aquifers of fresh water, enough liquid to fill a small sea. It is fossil water, a treasure laid down in prehistoric times, some of it possibly a million years old. Just 6,000 years ago, the Sahara was a much different place.
   It was green. Prehistoric rock art in the Sahara shows something surprising: hippopotamuses, which need year-round water.
   "We don't have much evidence of a tropical paradise o there, but we had something perfectly liveable," says Jenni£ Smith, a geologist at Washington University in St Loui s
The green Sahara was the product of the migrati
the paleo-monsoon. In the same way that iceage	a
go, so too do monsoons mig north	7he
dynamics of earth's motion ar		onsible. llii t of the earth's axis varies in a regul le  som ,    eplanet is more tilted towards th	so eti o. Thaxies also wobbles like a s · · g t p. Th, of th earth's perihelion -  its clos ap  achto  un - varies in a
cycle as well.
   At times wh	ort e	isphere tilts sharply towards the sun a    e pla		its closest approach,
the increa ast of sunl  t  ring the north's summer months c  c  se the  rica  monsoon (which currently occurs bef	the E	r and roughly 17°N latitude) to shift to the nort """""_r_,d 10,000 years ago, inundating North Africa.   
Around 5, ears agtohemonsoon shifted dramatically
southwar he prehistoric inhabitants of the Sahara discovered	their relatively green surroundings were under ng something worse than a drought (and perhaps they; d towards the Nile Valley, where Egyptian culture b# .:.:. ;.:.;"' flourish at around the same time).
e're learning, and only in recent years, that some
c ate changes in the past have been as rapid as anything underway today," says Robert Giegengack, a University of Pennsylvania geologist.
   As the land dried out and vegetation decreased, the soil lost its ability to hold water when it did rain. Fewer clouds

84	HORNBILL

formed from evaporation. When it rained, the water washed away and evaporated quickly. There was a kind of runaway drying effect. By 4,000 years ago the Sahara had become what it is today.
   No one knows how human-driven climate change may alter the Sahara in the future. It's something scientists can ponder while sipping bottled fossil water pumped from underground.
"It's the best water in Egypt," Giegengack said -  clean,
refreshing mineral water. If you want to drink something good, try the ancient buried treasure of the Sahara.	X,.

JOELACHE y
Staff Writer, Washingto'C:7




v"J ?
? ,e'Q.
(c)	e
'O
"'o
O"
"


