












fodo,i Coot ,1,,,{  A/,1" €,10
<z;
Notice these expressions in the text.	?	r
Infer their meaning from thecon "	"	.,I

honing our seafaring skills	n r:	vast ocean
V	Va

IN July 1976, e Mary,	nathan, 6,daughter Suzanne, 7, and I sets			Plym		 England, to duplicate the round- the-world voyage ma					s earlier by Captain James Cook. For the longest time, M=-t,1-ud I -	a 37-year-old businessman - had dreamt o sa··			in the wake of the famous explorer, and for the past 1		r			e had spent all our leisure time honing our seafaring	i sin British waters.
   Our Wavewalker, a 23metre, 30 ton wooden-hulled beauty,	n professionally built, and we had spent months fitti i  u andtesting it in the roughest weather we could find.
       ·rst leg of our planned three-year, 105,000 kilometre jour f passed pleasantly as we sailed down the west coast of Africa to Cape Town. There, before heading east, we took on two crewmen - American Larry Vigil and Swiss Herb Seigler - to help us tackle one of the world's roughest seas, the southern Indian Ocean.

14	HORNBILL

   On our second day out of Cape Town, we began to encounter strong gales. For the next few weeks, they blew continuously. Gales did not worry me; but the size of the waves was alarming - up to 15 metres, as high as our main mast.
   December 25 found us 3,500 kilometres east of Cape Town. Despite atrocious weather, we had a wonderful holiday complete with a Christmas tree. New Year's Day saw no improvement in the weather, but we reasoned that it had to change soon. And it did change - for the worse.
   At dawn on January 2, the waves were gigantic. We were sailing with only a small storm jib and were still making eight knots. As the ship rose to the top of each wave we could s endless enormous seas rolling towards us, and the screami
of the wind and spray was painful to the ears. To slow the J
down, we dropped the storm jib and lashed a hea
rope in a loop across the stern. hen we dou la ed everything, went through our life hd:ill, att c	lines, donned oilskins and life jackets9£n  aited'-..
   The first indication of i e		dis ,¥,  atabout 6 p.m., with an ominous s·  e. he win  r  ped, and the sky immediately grew da  .	ame	g roar, and an
enormous cloud towerecl!:ft,   e s · horror, I realised
	
It appeared perfect!	1 an		twice the height of the other waves, with a fri tful br:	crest.
   The roar i ed toathun r as the stern moved up the face of the wa d for aent I thought we might ride over
it. But then a tremen osion shook the deck. A torrent of green and white wa  o ke over the ship, my head smashed into the wheel and I wa  ware of flying overboard and sinking below the waves cepted my approaching death, and as I was losing co i ess, I felt quite peaceful.
  UnexP, :d iy head popped out of the water. A few metres away, Wi  walker was near capsizing, her masts almost hor ·zo.  ena wave hurled her upright, my lifeline jerked taut		ed the guard rails and sailed through the air into Wa	er's main boom. Subsequent waves tossed me around the d k like a rag doll. My left ribs cracked; my mouth filled with blood and broken teeth. Somehow, I found the wheel, lined up the stern for the next wave and hung on.
   Water, Water, Everywhere. I could feel that the ship had water below, but I dared not abandon the wheel to investigate. Suddenly,





WE'RE NOT AFRAID TO DIE ...	15

thefront hatch was thrown open and Maiy appeared. 'We're sinking!" she screamed. 'The decks are smashed; we're full of water."
'Take the wheel", I shouted as I scrambled for the hatch.
   Lany and Herb were pumping like madmen. Broken timbers hung at crazy angles, the whole starboard side bulged inwards; clothes, crockery, charts, tins and toys sloshed about in deep water.
   I half-swam, half-crawled into the children's cabin. "Are you all right?" I asked. "Yes," they answered from an upper bunk. "But my head hurts a bit," said Sue, pointing to a big bump above her eyes. I had no time to worry about bumped heads.
   After finding a hammer, screws and canvas, I struggled bac on deck. With the starboard side bashed open, we were taki
water with each wave that broke over us. If I coul	 some repairs, we would surely sink.
Somehow I managed to stretch canvas and secure	f
hatch covers across the gaping ho es		ome water u tl to stream below, but most of it was no	· g deflect	<\i	e side.
   More problems arose when o n ump		toblock up with the debris floating u		ca	the electric pump short-circuited. The	1 el ro eningly. Back on deck I found that o w   areh   umps had been
wrenched overboard n 'thth	y sail, the jib, the dinghies and the m ·  c or.
   Then I remembe	e had	electric pump under the chartroo r. I connecZcMo an out-pipe, and was thankful to fi  t  t it wor  d.L,
   The night	ed on  ·  n endless, bitterly cold routine of pumping, steering		·ng the radio. We were getting no replies to our Mayday	- which was not surprising in this remote corner ofword.
   Sue's hea<\l ollen alarmingly; she had two enormous black eyes, a w shsheowed us a deep cut on her arm. When I a d whsyhheadn't made more of her injuries before this, s  d, "I didn't want to worry you when you were
us all."


By morning on January 3, the pumps had the water level sufficiently under control for us to take two hours' rest in rotation. But we still had a tremendous leak somewhere below the waterline and, on checking, I found that nearly all the boat's

16	HORNBILL

main rib frames were smashed down to the keel. In fact, there was nothing holding up a whole section of the starboard hull except a few cupboard partitions.
   We had survived for 15 hours since the wave hit, but Wavewalker wouldn't hold together long enough for us to reach Australia. I checked our charts and calculated that there were two small islands a few hundred kilometres to the east. One of them, Ile Amsterdam, was a French scientific base. Our only hope was to reach these pinpricks in the vast ocean. Butunless the wind and seas abated so we could hoist sail, our chances would be slim indeed. The great wave had put our
engine out of action.
   On January 4, after 36 hours of continuous pumping reached the last few centimetres of water. Now, we had o keep pace with the water still coming in. We could
sail on the main mast. Pressure5he rigging
pull the damaged section of the	part, so  {.  tedthe
storm jib and headed for where	t the	ds were. Mary found some corned be rr er ker 'l., anwde ate our first meal in almost two  s.		\..
But our respite was s  rt-h  . At 4 n.rn ack clouds began
building up behind us·	i ho	d wback tao 40 s knots and the seas _.ri"lll<f,e  mg hi		e weather continued
to deteriorate throug	u	e ni	y dawn on January 5,
our situation  gairr despe	e.
   When I w   i  o com o  the  hildren, Jon asked, "Daddy, are we going t  . " I trie	sure him that we could make it. "But, Daddy," he we ""'f!l,aren't afraid of dying ifwe can all be together-you an my, SuaenId."
   I could find n rds with which to respond, but I left the children's ca mined tofight the sea with everything I had. Toprotec weakened starboard side, I decided to heave­ to - with1fe un amaged port hull facing the oncoming waves, using a sed seanachor of heavy nylon rope and two 22
litre  barrels of paraffin.
evening, Mary and I sat together holding hands, as the
moti of the ship brought more and more water in through the broken planks. We both felt the end was very near.
   But Wavewalker rode out the storm and by the morning of January 6, with the wind easing, I tried to get a reading on the sextant. Back in the chartroom, I worked on wind speeds,





WE'RE NOT AFRAID TO DIE ...	17

changes of course, drift and current in an effort to calculate our position. The best I could determine was that we were somewhere in 150,000 kilometres of ocean looking for a 65 kilometre-wide island.
   While I was thinking, Sue, moving painfully, joined me. The left side of her head was now very swollen and her blackened eyes narrowed to slits. She gave me a card she had made.
   On the front she had drawn caricatures of Mary and me with the words: "Here are some funny people. Did they make you laugh? I laughed a lot as well." Inside was a message: "Oh, how I love you both. So this card is to say thank you and let' hope for the best." Somehow we had to make it.


I checked and rechecked my calculations. We had lo """'=u compass and I was using a spare w ·	hadnotbee
for magnetic variation. I made an a	nee for tl1il		other estimate of the  influence of th te ycur	ichflow
through this part of the Ind -	a .	'
   About 2 p.m., I went o		k	nd a;se		rry to steer a course of 185 degrees.	w		re luc	,	old him with a
conviction I did not l uld e	see the island at about 5 p.m.
   Then with a hea		e	t, I w				, climbed on my bunk and amazingly d o .When	o		it was 6 p.m., and growing dark. I knew	st have misse		the island, and with the sail we had left, we	 n't hora	beat back into the westerly winds.
   At that moment, a	ead appeared by my bunk. "Can I have a hug?" Jonathan		Suewas right behind him.
"Why am I ge	a Hug now?" I asked.
   "Because .	he best daddy in the whole world -	and the best capt y sorneplied.
"Not t*y, Jon, I'm afraid."
   "Wh llli( ust be," said Sue in a matter-of-fact voice. "You found	i and."
. !shouted.
   · out there in front of us," they chorused, "as big as a battleship."
   I rushed on deck and gazed with relief at the stark outline of Ile Amsterdam. It was only a bleak piece of volcanic rock, with little vegetation - the most beautiful island in the world!

18	HORNBILL

   We anchored offshore for the night, and the next morning all 28 inhabitants of the island cheered as they helped us ashore.
   With land under my feet again, my thoughts were full of Larry and Herbie, cheerful and optimistic under the direst stress, and of Mary, who stayed at the wheel for all those crucial hours. Most of all, I thought of a seven-year-old girl, who did not want us to worry about a head injury (which subsequently took six minor operations to remove a recurring blood clot between skin and skull), and of a six-year-old boy who was not afraid to die.



Understanding the text	¦
1. List the steps taken by the captai
(i) to protect the ship when roug	ther bega8.
(ii) to check the flooding of the i:-r heshi
tho
Talking  abou	te\.<l,'Q.
Discuss the fol	questi ·th your partner.
1. What differ id o		i	between the reaction of the adults and the children w	e with danger?
2. How does the story s	est that optimism helps to endure "the direst stress"?
3. What lesso d	learn from such hazardous experiences when we are a e-t e with death?
4. Why do	u hink people undertake such adventurous expeditions in s:<:)f		erisks involved?

Th g about language	¦

1. We have come across words like 'gale' and 'storm' in the account. Here are two more words for 'storm': typhoon, cyclone. How many words does your language have for 'storm'?






WE'RE NOT AFRAID TO DIE ...	19

2. Here are the terms for different kinds of vessels: yacht, boat, canoe, ship, steamer, schooner. Think of similar terms in your language.
3. 'Catamaran'	is a kind of a boat. Do you know which Indian language this word is derived from? Check the dictionary.
4. Have you heard any boatmen's songs? What kind of emotions do these songs usually express?

Working with words	¦
1. The following words used in the text as ship terminology are also commonly used in another sense.
you use the other meaning?

knot	stern	boom	hatch

2. The following three compound each of them mean?

airship
''CJ
3. The following are		mgs listO  the dictionary against the phrase 'take '.	hich	is it used in the third paragraph of the ac  unt:
take on st-10	to "n tohave a particular quality or
ap ce; toassume sth
take sb on:	ploy sbtoe;ngage sb
ccept sbasone's opponent in a game, contest or conflict
take sb I st	to decide to do sth; to allow sth/sb toenter
V	e.g. a bus, plane or ship; to take sth/sb
on board

Th s todo	¦
1. Given on the next page is a picture of a yacht. Label the parts of the yacht using the terms given in the box.

20	HORNBILL






















2. 














Land area in square kilometres uth Indian Ocean, between uthernmost parts of Australia and
South Africa37 92 S, 77 67 EFrancePart of French Southern and Antarctic Lands35Meteorological station staff86
3. Locate Ile Amsterdam on the world map.





WE'RE NOT AFRAID TO DIE ...	21

---Notes---
This is a first person account of an adventurous ordeal that a family experiences.

Understanding the text  •
This section deals with factual and global comprehension. Practice is given in describing and noticing text organisation.

Talking about the text  •
Peer interaction about subjective responses to the text; empathy wit and comment on universal experiences; and human behaviour relat to risk-taking and adventure.

Thinking about language ¦
• Variety of terms for a particular it	differe°l_'-.  s
• English words derived from In	ages ,. ,,,,,'',_
• Linking language to music	;;song

Working with words	¦
• 'Ship' terms as hoiiJfJ...._ Y.	,
• Compound words hip'	connotations
• Phrasal ver

Things to do
• Honing reference	y finding facts from the Internet, the encyclopedia, and m
• Exposure to	genres of fact presentation



<::--0


