
1107ZCH07
Tk Mvedwr1e



The present story is an adapted version. The original text of the story can be consulted on the NCERT website : www.ncert.nic.in
* Now known as Mumbai




THE ADVENTURE	61


   "This is where the British Raj begins. You are going for the first time, I presume?" Khan Sahib asked.
   "Yes." The reply was factually correct. Gangadharpant had not been to this Bombay before. He ventured a question: "And, Khan Sahib, how will you go to Peshawar?"
   "This train goes to the Victoria Terminus*. I will take the Frontier Mail tonight out of Central."
"How far does it go? By what route?"
   "Bombay to Delhi, then to Lahore and then Peshawar. A long journey. I will reach Peshawar the day after tomorrow."
   Thereafter, Khan Sahib spoke a lot about his business and Gangadharpant was a willing listener. For, in that way, he was able to get some flavour of life in this India that wasso different.
   The train nowpassed through the suburban rail traffic. "-/ blue carriages carried the letters, GBMR,	n the side.
"Greater Bombay Metropolitan R ·	y," explai d
Sahib. "See the tiny Union Jack p ·  ed	each
gentle reminder that we are in Bri	·tory."	111i,.,
   The train began to slow do	nd Dad	'"s opped only at its destination, Victo·a: r ·nus.h		looked remarkably neat and clea  The   f was   st  made up of
Anglo-Indians and Par e	g	a	'tish officers.
   As he emerged fr:	e ation, G	harpant found himself facing an impo		'lding. T tt onitproclaimed its identity to those who  d not Bombay landmark:
DIA HOUSE HEAD ARTERS OF
EAST ""COMPANY
Prepared as he was foMr	s,Professor Gaitonde had not
expected this. The East In	mpany had been wound up shortly after the events of 1	 at east, that is what history books said. Yet, here it wa o yalive but flourishing. So, history had taken a differen rn, erhaps before 1857. How and when had it happened5..  ha   find out.
As he    e  along Hornby Road, as it was called, he found
a differoe of shops and office buildings. There was no Ha	ouse building. Instead, there were Boots and Wo wo departmental stores, imposing offices of Lloyds, Bare  s and other British banks, as in a typical high street of a town in England.


*  Now known as Chattrapati Shivaji Terminus

62	HORNBILL


   He turned right along Home Street and entered Forbes building.
   "I wish to meet Mr Vinay Gaitonde, please," he said to the English receptionist.
   She searched through the telephone list, the staff list and then through the directory of employees of all the branches of the firm. She shook her head and said, "I am afraid I can't find anyone of that name either here or in any of our branches. Are you sure he works here?"
   This was a blow, not totally unexpected. If he himself dead in this world, what guarantee had he that his son woul be alive? Indeed, he may not even have been born!
   He thanked the girl politely and came out. It characteristic of him not to worry about where he
His main concern was to mak · waytothieb  o the Asiatic Society to solve the rid  f history. a · quick lunch at a restaurant, he ma  is  y to t	11.

Yes, to his relief, the Tnu- ...... a  as th t dhioduse the library. He entered t  read   oom an  as   for a list of history
books including
His five vol   e   .  arrived   h  table. He started from
the beginning.	one to e,. · tory up to the period of Ashoka, volume t  up to .f gupta, volume three up to Moham ori andvolum ur uptothedeath of Aurangzeb. Up tot	· d histo			as he knew it. The change evidently had occ		in the 1		ume.
   Reading vol		m both ends inwards, Gangadharpant finally converged o	precise moment where history had taken a different t
That in hebook described the Battle of Panipat, and it
mention t the Marathas won it handsomely. Abdali was ro an ewacshased back to Kabul by the triumphant Ma  a army led by Sadashivrao Bhau and his nephew, the y	shwasrao.
 e book did not go into a blow-by-blow account of the ttle itself. Rather, it elaborated in detail its consequences for the power struggle in India. Gangadharpant read through the
account avidly. The style of writing was unmistakably his, yet he was reading the account for the first time!




THE ADVENTURE	63


   Their victory in the battle was not only a great morale booster to the Marathas but it also established their supremacy in northern India. The East India Company, which had been watching these developments from the sidelines, got the message and temporarily shelved its expansionist programme.
   For the Peshwas the immediate result was an increase in the influence of Bhausaheb and Vishwasrao who eventfully succeeded his father in 1780 A.D. The trouble-maker, Dadasaheb, was relegated to the background and he eventually retired from state politics.
   To its dismay, the East India Company met its match in the new Maratha ruler, Vishwasrao. He and his brother, Madhavrao, combined political acumen with valour and
systematically expanded their influence all over India.	'(./ Company was reduced to pockets of·n	ence near Bo
Calcutta* and Madrast, just like it	ropean ri al	e
Portuguese and the French.	'-.-
   Foporlitical reasons, the P s		the e hal regime alive in Delhi. In the ni	e	century	es	facto
rulers from Pune were		e		ugh o		isethe importance of the technol	ical a		dawnin	·n	rope. They

set up their own cent e	o		ci		ce East India Company		no	er
   
gy. Here, the ty  to  extend its

influence. It offered ai	perts.	e accepted only to make the local e tres se -sufficiJt.
The twent·	ntury  broug,about  further  changes
inspired by th	. Indiae_d towards a democracy. By then, the Pesh had los		enterprise and they were gradually replaced b cratically elected bodies. The Sultanate at Delhi surviv¥n this transition, largely because it wielded no real i  ence. The Shahenshah of Delhi was no more than an_,,,,,-.  o rubber-stamp the 'recommendations' made by the ce		rliament.
As he ry. _on,  angadharpant began to appreciate the India
he had se was acountry that had not been subjected to
sla ery  r  e white man; it had learnt to stand on its feet and kne		If-respect was. From a position of strength and for pu	mercial reasons, it had allowed the British to retain


* Now known as Kolkata
t Now known as Chennai

64	HORNBILL


Bombay as the sole outpost on the subcontinent. That lease was to expire in the year 2001, according to a treaty of 1908.
   Gangadharpant could not help comparing the country he knew with what he was witnessing around him.
   But, at the same time, he felt that his investigations were incomplete. How did the Marathas win the battle? To find the answer he must look for accounts of the battle itself.
   He went through the books and journals before him. At last, among the books he found one that gave him the clue. It was Bhausahebanchi Bakhar.
Although he seldom relied on the Bakhars for historic
evidence, he found them entertaining to read. Sometimes, in the	graphic but doctored accounts, he could spot the of truth. He found one now in a three-line account Vishwasrao had come to being kil	:
... And then Vishwasrao guided	s	rse to the	•cthe elite troops were fighting an$tt		edthe "'- d od was
merciful. A shot brushe g	·	. Eve	ceof a til
(sesame) would have le	·	th.
   At eight o'clock t b · politew i tied the professor that the library w s  sin or the adharpant emerged from his thoughts.    · g arou   he  oticed that he was the
only reader le	mag if'	.
"I beg your p  don, sir!	e uest you to keep these
books	my use tomo w morning? By the way, when do you op  "
   "Ate	'clock, s " e librarian smiled. Here was a user and researcher ·	is heart.
   As the profess	the table he shoved some notes into his right pocket. Absen  indedly, he also shoved the Bakhar into his left poc


He ,i,.,,-1a guest house to stay in and had a frugal meal. He ut for a stroll towards the Azad Maidan.
...	the maidan he found a throng moving towards a pandal.
  , a lecture was to take place. Force of habit took Professor aitonde towards the pandal. The lecture was in progress, although people kept coming and going. But Professor Gaitonde was not looking at the audience. He was staring at the platform




THE ADVENTURE	65


as if mesmerised. There was a table and a chair but the latter was unoccupied.
   The presidential chair unoccupied! The sight stirred him to the depths. Like a piece of iron attracted to a magnet, he swiftly moved towards the chair.
   The speaker stopped in mid-sentence, too shocked to continue. But the audience soon found voice.
"Vacate the chair!"
"This lecture series has no chairperson ..." "Away from the platform, mister!"
"The chair is symbolic, don't you know?"
   What nonsense! Whoever heard of a public lecture without a presiding dignitary? Professor Gaitonde went to the mike and
gave vent to his views. "Ladies and gentlemen, an unch '(./ lecture is like Shakespeare's Hamle · hout the Prin ce Denmark. Let me tell you..."	?
But the audience was in no moo is	."TelltTti·	.
We are sick of remarks from the ch	,	te of than  lliio..	ng
introductions."	"'
"Weonlywanttolisten o		e		er..." "We abolished the old c	toms		g ago...
"Keep the platform pl	se..".
   But Gangadharpa		experien o speaking at 999 meetings and had face	une arnOc    its most hostile.
He kept on talke·n.	.f '(./
He soon be   e  target for a s er of tomatoes, eggs and
other objects.	kept ng valiantly to correct this sacrilege. Final , e audie armed tothestage to eject him bodily.
And, in the crowd Ga¥arpant wasnowhere to be seen.
0
"That is alg;a ell, Rajendra. All I know is that I was  found
in the Aza  aidan in the morning. But I was back in the world I am fa "411th.Now, where exactly did I spend those two day  as absent from here?"
aj  dra was dumbfounded by the narrative. It took him a
whil   reply.
   "Professor, before, just prior to your collision with the truck, what were you doing?" Rajendra asked.

66	HORNBILL


   "I was thinking of the catastrophe theory and its implications for history."
"Right! I thought so!" Rajendra smiled.
   "Don't smile smugly. In case you think that it wasjust my mind playing tricks and my imagination running amok, look at this."
And, triumphantly, Professor Gaitonde produced his vital

piece of evidence: a page torn out of a book.

camo

   Rajendra read the text on the printed page and his face underwent a change. Gone was the smile and in its place
a  grave expression. He was visibly moved.
   Gangadharpant pressed home his advantage. "I	a inadvertently slipped the Bakhar in my pocket as I left the li
I discovered my error when I was paying for my	e intended to return it the next mor ·ng. But it seems				t 1 the melee of Azad Maidan, the book		lost; only ti ·s		- f page remained. And, luckily for me,	e p		econta · s  ·t			·dence."
Rajendra again read the	t	escribed	1shwasrao
narrowly missed the bu ,		howt	, taken as an omen by the Marath , t	edt e \i,. heir favour.
"Now look at thi	Ga	arpa	r	uced his own copy
of Bhausaheban	i	akh	, open	relevant page. The account ran th s:
...And then Vis as o gu1J·d o;;,r to the melee where the elite tr o were fl ting, an  e d them. And God expressed His di  as re. He was hit b  e bullet.
   "Pro	Gaitonca.au have given me food for thought. Until I saw th	evidence, I had	simply put your
experience down		tasy. But facts can be stranger than fantasies, as I am o	mning to realise."
   "Facts? ,.	are the facts? I am dying to know!" Professor Gaiton '-/


motioned himtosilence and started pacing the room, sly under great mental strain. Finally, he turned around aid, "Professor Gaitonde, I will try to rationalise your
  perience on the basis of two scientific theories as known today. ether I succeed or not in convincing you of the facts, only you can judge -  for you have indeed passed through a fantastic
experience: or, more correctly, a catastrophic experience!"




THE ADVENTURE	67


   "Please continue, Rajendra! I am all ears," Professor Gaitonde replied. Rajendra continued pacing as he talked.
   "You have heard a lot about the catastrophe theory at that seminar. Let us apply it to the Battle of Panipat. Wars fought face to face on open grounds offer excellent examples of this theory. The Maratha army was facing Abdali's troops on the field of Panipat. There was no great disparity between the latter's troops and the opposing forces. Their armour was comparable. So, a lot depended on the leadership and the morale of the troops. The juncture at which Vishwasrao, the son of and heir to the Peshwa, was killed proved to be the turning point. As history has it, his uncle, Bhausaheb, rushed into the melee and was never seen again. Whether he was killed in battle or survived is
&.
not known. But for the troops at that particular moment,	'(./ blow of losing their leaders was crucia . T ey lost their mo		e
and fighting spirit. There followed an u	r rout.
   "Exactly, Professor! And what y a		shown	t			t torn page is the course taken by	e		tt , when				et missed Vishwasrao. A crucial ev	t		e		e ot		.	d its


and provided just that difference," Rajendra sai .

t Te


allthe

"Maybe so. Similar st	are m  e a out the Battle of
Waterloo, which Nap	uld ha'-lifn		ut we live in a unique world which has unique ·	h idea of 'it might have been' is o the sake of sp !a 10n but not for reality," Gangadharpa  ai		>
   "I take issu	you thi::>In fact, that brings me to my second point which yo	strange; but please hear me out," Rajendra said.
   Gangadharpant listene xpectantly as Rajendra continued. "What do we mean ality? We experience it directly with our senses or indir struments. Buitsitlimited to what we see? Does it hav er manifestations?
   "That lity manyobteunique has been found from experi iiiL.	very small systems - of atoms and their constit  n particles. When dealing with such systems the
phy:	covered something startling. The behaviour of these sys  s annot be predicted definitively even if all the physical laws  verning those systems are known.
   "Take an example. I fire an electron from a source. Where will it go? If I fire a bullet from a gun in a given direction at a given

68	HORNBILL


speed, I know where it will be at a later time. But I cannot make such an assertion for the electron. It may be here, there, anywhere. I can at best quote odds for it being found in a specified location at a specified time."
   "The lack of determinism in quantum theory! Even an ignoramus historian like me has  heard of it," Professor
Gaitonde said.
   "So, imagine many world pictures. In one world the electron is found here, in another it is over there. In yet another it is in a still different location. Once the observer finds where it is, know which world we are talking about. But all those alternativ: worlds could exist just the same." Rajendra paused to mar a histhoughts.
   "But is there any contact between those ma Professor Gaitonde asked.
"Yes and no! Imagine two w	ds, for exa l<	than
electron is orbiting the nude	of	atom..". ,--
   "Like planets around the		" G ngadha nterjected. "Not quite. We know t	·se traje	e planet. The
electron could be orbit' · a of a lar: e	er of specified states. These states  ay o   ed to i  nt   f  e world. In state
no.l we have t e 1 tro ·n a sta	·  er energy. In state no. 2 it is in a ta		er ener . I can make a jump from high to low ene	send 01'1)>£ e of radiation. Or a pulse
of radiation can k' ck it ou I	no.2 into state no.l. Such transiti e common in icroscopic systems. What if it happen  o   macros ·c le el?" Rajendra said.
"I ge	. You are	sting that I made a transition from
one world to an		ack again?" Gangadharpant asked. "Fantastic tho	h t seems, this is the only explanation I
can offer. M eory 1 that catastrophic situations offer radically different al	rn	ives for the world to proceed. It seems that so
far as rVit,-_. concerned all alternatives are viable but the
obs erx- perience only one of them at a time.
 making a transition, you were able to experience two worlds one at a time. The one you live in now and the one where ent two days. One has the history we know, the other a nt history. The separation or bifurcation took place in the of Panipat. You neither travelled to the past nortothe future.
You were in the present but experiencing a different world. Of course, by the same token there must be many more different worlds arising out of bifurcations at different points of time."




THE ADVENTURE	69


   As Rajendra concluded, Gangadharpant asked the question that was beginning to bother him most. "But why did I make the transition?"
   "If I knew the answer I would solve a great problem. Unfortunately, there are many unsolved questions in science and this is oneof them. But that does not stop me from guessing." Rajendra smiled and proceeded, "You need some interaction to cause a transition. Perhaps, at the time of the collision you were thinking about the catastrophe theory and its role in wars. Maybe you were wondering about the Battle of Panipat. Perhaps, the neurons in your brain acted as a trigger."
   "A good guess. I was indeed wondering what course history would have taken if the result of the battle had gone the other
way," Professor Gaitonde said. "That was going to be the toP. C	"-/ my thousandth presidential address."
"Now you are in the happy position	recounting yo
life experience rather than just specu	in  "Rajend  l!!f .
ButGangadharpant  was grave.	,.,.
   "No, Rajendra, my thousand		ss as m		Azad Maidan when I was so rudel	ru ed. No e rofessor Gaitonde who disappeared w  de:1llli f1g his c  ·	e platform
will now never be see ding   anot	ng  I  have
conveyed my regrets to th  r    ers of	·pat seminar."


1. The story is an acco	t	real events.
2. The story hin n aparticular historical event.
3. Rajendr	a dewasa historian.
4. The place	10ned in the story are all imaginary.
5. Th ry tries to relate history to science.
II. BrieAM. the following statements from the text.
1	·: either travelled to the past nor the future. You were in present experiencing a different world."
"You have passed through a fantastic experience: or more correctly, a catastrophic experience."
3. Gangadharpant could not help comparing the country he knew	with what he was witnessing around him.

70	HORNBILL


4. "The lack of determinism in quantum theory!"
5. "You need some interaction to cause a transition."

Talking about the text	¦





THE ADVENTURE	71


2. to give vent to
(i) to express
(ii) to emphasise
(iii) suppress
(iv) dismiss
3. to stand on one's feet
(i) to be physically strong
(ii) to be independent
(iii) to stand erect
4. '.' '.be o :: :e:::::	e;
(:: ::: o :::;::::d	''"
5. to  meet one's match	v	.'V
(i) to meeta p rt e	ho	s simila
(ii) to meet an	e
(iv)	to feat	""'f(J
II. Distinguish	the foll g_pairs of sentences.
1. (i)	He was visi
(ii) He was visuall aired.
2. (i)	Green	stripes were used alternately.
(ii) Gre4}J(s	could be used or alternatively black ones.
3. (i)	The t played thetwo matches successfully.
(ii) earn played two matches successively.
4. he librarian spoke respectfully to the learned scholar. ou will find the historian and the scientist in the
archaeology and natural science sections of the museum respectively.

72	HORNBILL


Noticing form	¦
The story deals with unreal and hypothetical conditions. Some of the sentences used to express this notion are given below:
l.	If I fire a bullet from a gun in a given direction at a given speed. I know where it will be at a later time.
2. If I knew the answer I would solve a great problem.	0
3. If he himself were dead in this world. what guarantee had he that his son would be alive.
4. What course would history have taken if the battle had gone t other way?
Notice that in an unreal condition, it is clearly expected th condition will not be fulfilled.


Things to do  ¦
I. Read the following	5
from the Internet.

('.	·0
e Cal':°l eory downloaded

Originat d		t		nch ma m the 196			strophe dynamica	ys ems

tician, Rene Thom, in a special branch of udies and  classifies

mena  aracter·  d    udden shifts in behaviour
rom small chan   in circumstances.
   C stroph		bifurcations between different e · · ria, or fix  o· t attractors. Due to their restricted nature, c	can be classified on the basis of how many contr a meters are being simultaneously varied. For example,  here are two controls, then one finds the most on type, called a 'cusp' catastrophe. If, however, t  '-Jiore than five controls, there is no classification.
, .-r strophe theory has been applied to a number of d 'fferent phenomena, such as the stability of ships at sea d their capsizing, bridge collapse, and, with some less nvincing success, the fight-or-flight behaviour of animals
and pdson riots.




THE ADVENTURE	73


II. Look up the Internet or an encyclopedia for information on the following theories.
(i) Quantum theory
(ii) Theory of relativity
(iii) Big Bang theory
(iv) Theory of evolution

---Notes---

Understanding the text  •
• True/false items to check inferential comprehension
• Explaining statements from the text
Talking about the text  •	,JI(_	?
• Discussing approaches of varioius b oknowl	uiry

(across the curriculum)	""'4,

,v'

Thinking about langua e r	&
• Inter-community co	thro	on languages
• Reference to language	f  1 ferent  ·  ·  i e
Working with	¦	e
• Idiomatic expression
• Distinction between fre<¥y misused word forms: respectively/ respectfully
Noticing form	0
Conditiona nces for unreal and hypothetical conditions

ThingsA	¦
Fin Yabout popular scientific theories (,eal-life <eading)


