




11072CH08
	






Notice these expressions in the text. Infer their meaning from the context.


ducking back	swathe	C'ilfe
manoeuvres	cairn o "	.I
,'	..._,	'-.'




we said our goodbyes.  nde Q  loud like long French loaves glowed - k as he su ed tosplash the distant mountain top ·t a rose-tinted sh. Now that we were leaving Ravu, Lhamo	sh w		to give me a farewell present. Oneevening I'd told h	Daniel that I was heading towards Mount Kailash to comp e he kora, and she'd said that I ought to get some warm lot es.After ducking back into her tent, she emerged n oonf  theelong-sleeved sheepskin coats that all the m		e. Tsetan sized me up as we clambered into his car. "  , yes, he declared, "drokba, sir."
   We t		ort cut to get off the Changtang. Tsetan knew a route t t ould take us south-west, almost directly towards Mo	ash. It involved crossing several fairly high mountain pas8', ne said. "But no problem, sir", he assured us, "if there is no snow." What was the likelihood of that I asked. "Not knowing, sir, until we get there."
   From the gently rolling hills of Ravu, the short cut took us across vast open plains with nothing in them except a few gazelles

60	HORNBILL













- ,	 ::f .Jt- -=-c	X.
-	---,	,--	-

Sketcho;Mount l s
that would look up from nibblin	rid pas		frown before bounding away into the v f eonr,	e plains
became more stony than gr Y, at h ld ascamse into view. Tsetan told us w  e  proac m long before they appeared. "Kyang,"  e sai  pointin:_ rds afar-off pall of dust. When we dre		r could erd galloping en masse, wheeling an	·ng in ti	ation as if they were practising manoeuvr  on som::"!e  ined course. Plumes
of dust billow to thecrisp,  ir.
   As hills	r		to p p once more from the rocky wilderness, w		ssed s ·			drokbas tending their flocks. Sometimes men, so			omen, these well-wrapped figures would pause and star	our car, occasionally waving as we passed. When the k took us close to their animals, the sheep would take evy on, veering away from the speeding vehicle. We passed n ds' dark tents pitched in splendid isolation,
usually wiWa huge black dog, a Tibetan mastiff, standing guard.
These bl"'II\Mould cock their great big heads when they became aw r		approach and fix us in their sights. As we continued to	loser, they would explode into action, speeding directly towa  s us, like a bullet from a gun and nearly as fast.
   These shaggy monsters, blacker than the darkest night, usually wore bright red collars and barked furiously with massive jaws. They were completely fearless of our vehicle, shooting straight into our path, causing Tsetan to brake and swerve. The






SILK ROAD	61

dogwould make chase for a hundred metres or so before easing off, having seen us off the property. It wasn't difficult to understand why ferocious Tibetan mastiffs became popular in China's imperial courts as hunting dogs, brought along the Silk Road in ancient times as tribute from Tibet.
   By now we could see snow-capped mountains gathering on the horizon. We entered a valley where the river was wide and mostly clogged with ice, brilliant white and glinting in the sunshine. Thetrail hugged its bank, twisting with the meanders as we gradually gained height and the valley sides closed in.
   The turns became sharper and the ride bumpier, Tseta now in third gear as we continued to climb. The track move away from the icy river, labouring through steeper slopes sported big rocks daubed with patches of bright orange li Beneath the rocks, hunks of snow clung on in				- permanent shade. I felt the press building up ·il			ars, held my nose, snorted and cleare	m. We sit'		round another tight bend and Tseta		. He	nedhis
door and jumped out of h 's e			or Mi,. what was going on. "Snow," said Dani		o exit	ehicle, letting in a breath of cold air a  e	o.
   A swathe of the w · st lay a			e track in front of us, stretching form	· een m	ore it petered out and the dirt trail reappea . he			ued on either side of us, smoothin abrupt ban n e upslope side. The bank was too steep r o r vehici!i.c e,sothere was no way round the snow pat	joined  'el as Tsetan stepped on to the encrusted snow and		ither and slide forward, stamping his foot from time to :i ascertain howsturdy it was. I looked at my wristwatchiwere at 5,210 metres above sea level.
The snow	1 ok too deep to me, but the danger wasn't
its depth, Dan 1 , so much as its icy top layer. "If we slip off,
the	turn over," he suggested, as we saw Tsetan grab
handfu				· t and fling them across the frozen surface. We bot i			inand, when the snow was spread with soil, Daniel an	s		ed out of the vehicle to lighten Tsetan's load. He backed up a		drove towards the dirty snow, eased the car on to its icy surface and slowly drove its length without apparent difficulty. Ten minutes later, we stopped at another blockage. "Not good, sir," Tsetan announced as he jumped out again to survey the scene. This time he decided to try and drive round the snow.

62	HORNBILL

The slope was steep and studded with major rocks, but somehow Tsetan negotiated them, his four-wheel drive vehicle lurching from one obstacle to the next. In so doing he cut off one of the hairpin bends, regaining the trail further up where the snow had not drifted.
   I checked my watch again as we continued to climb in the bright sunshine. We crept past 5,400 metres and my head began to throb horribly. I took gulps from my water bottle, which is supposed to help a rapid ascent.
   We finally reached the top of the pass at 5,515 metres. It was marked by a large cairn of rocks festooned with white silk
and	ragged prayer flags. We all took a turn round the cairn, in
clockwise direction as is the tradition, and Tsetan check d tyres on his vehicle. He stopped at the petrol tank and p	· unscrewed the top, which emitted a loud hiss.		r
atmospheric pressure was allowing uel toexpan -' 1:1 ded dangerous to me. "Maybe, sir," Tset	ughed "b \.._rlil	oking."
   My headache soon cleared							ee ed		 ""		e other side of the pass. It was two		 -' !: the·				stopped for lunch. We ate hot noodles i		· e	 long					ent, part of a workcamp erected bes e a				salt					he plateau is pockmarked with s t			 sa dbrae						es, vestiges of the Tethys Ocean whic					re T 'be					the great continental collision that lifted if				ard.				o		 as a hive of activity, men with pickio		nd		hovels		u			ng back and forth in their long sheeps ·	 ats an		sal encrusted boots. All wore sunglasses a	the gl					a steady stream of blue trucks emerged from the bli,'-lu'"1"1111:J'	 hite lake laden with piles of salt. By late afternoon			ad reached the small town of Hor, back on the main t-west highway that followed the old trade
route from L-w,	Kashmir. Daniel, who was returning to
Lhasa, found	m a truck so Tsetan and I bade him farewell
outside a,tre-repair shop. We had suffered two punctures in quick s  n otnhdreive down from the salt lake and Tsetan was ea		have them fixed since they left him with no spares. Be	e second tyre he'd changed had been replaced by onetwas assmooth as my bald head.
   Hor was a grim, miserable place. There was no vegetation whatsoever, just dust and rocks, liberally scattered with years of accumulated refuse, which was unfortunate given that the town sat on the shore of Lake Manasarovar, Tibet's most





SILK ROAD	63

venerated stretch of water. Ancient Hindu and Buddhist cosmology pinpoints Manasarovar as the source of four great Indian rivers: the Indus, the Ganges, the Sutlej and the Brahmaputra. Actually only the Sutlej flows from the lake, but the headwaters of the others all rise nearby on the flanks of Mount Kailash. We were within striking distance of the great mountain and I was eager to forge ahead.
   But I had to wait. Tsetan told me to go and drink some tea in Hor's only cafe which, like all the other buildings in town, was constructed from badly painted concrete and had three broken windows. The good view of the lake through one of them helpe to compensate for the draught.
   I was served by a Chinese youth in military uniforYe, spread the grease around on my table with a filthy rag bringing me a glass a:r}d a thermos of tea.
   Half an hour later, Tsetan re i	d me from y/olary confinement and we drove past a		ore roe ,-	bbish
westwards out of town towards t	ailash''
   My experience in Hor c	s rk },,,.toaccounts I'd read of earlier travell  f t e '-.. s with Lake Manasarovar. Ekai Ka u · aJap e monk who had
arrived there in 190 , l ov d			anctity of the lake that he burst into	couple		s later, the hallowed waters had a similar e on S	, a Swede who wasn't prone to sent191·  tal o tburst
It was d	the tlj·  e we finally left again and after
10.30 p.m. w	up o  ea guest house in Darchen for what turned out to		troubled night. Kicking around in the open-air rubbis mp that passed for the town of Hor had set off my c nce more, though if truth be told it had never quite div,P ed with my herbal tea. One of my nostrils was blocked a nd asI lay down to sleep, I wasn't convinced
that the Wier would provide me with sufficient oxygen. My watch WI waast4,760 metres. It wasn't much higher
than R	nd there I'd been gasping for oxygen several times ev g t.I'dgrown accustomed to these nocturnal dist a"nces bynow, but they still scared me.
   Tired and hungry, I started breathing through my mouth. After a while, I switched to single-nostril power which seemed to be admitting enough oxygen but, just as I was  drifting off, I woke up abruptly. Something was wrong. My chest felt

64	HORNBILL

strangely heavy and I sat up, a movement that cleared my nasal passages almost instantly and relieved the feeling in my chest. Curious, I thought.
   I lay back down and tried again. Same result. I was on the point of disappearing into the land of nod when something told me not to. It must have been those emergency electrical impulses again, but this was not the same as on previous occasions. This time, I wasn't gasping for breath, I was simply not allowed to go to sleep.
   Sitting up once more immediately made me feel better. I could breathe freely and my chest felt fine. But as soon as I 1 down, my sinuses filled and my chest was odd. I tried proppi myself upright against the wall, but now I couldn't mana relax enough to drop off. I couldn't put my finger on the re
but I was afraid to go to sleep. A little voice insi	s saying that if I did I might never e upagain.
awake all night.	?
   Tsetan took me to the Dare	e al coll			allowing morning. The medical colleg t r en				and looked like a monastery from the o · e h av		door that led into a large courtyard. W un  econ lb room which was dark and cold and o c	b a Tibe	or who wore none of the paraphernali		een· Cling. No white coat, he
looked like any other  ·oe an  wiu.111iar,ci•c	pullover and a woolly
aversion to ly·	, he s  ot m  a few questions while feeling
the veins in	st.
   "It's a cold," hes	·		through Tsetan. "A cold and the effects of altitude. I'll		ou something for it."
   I asked hi if		hought I'd recover enough to be able to do the kora. "Oh	"		said, "you'll be fine."
   I walked o	e medical college clutching a brown envelope stuffed wV fifteen screws of paper. I had  a five-day course of
Tibetan e which I started right away. I opened an after­ breakfa:  ckage and found it contained a brown powder that I h a ewith hot water. It tasted just like cinnamon. The con t; of the lunchtime and bedtime packages were less obviously identifiable. Both contained small, spherical brown pellets. They looked suspiciously like sheep dung, but of course I took them. That night, after my first full day's course, I slept very soundly. Like a log, not a dead man.





SILK ROAD	65

   Once he saw that I was going to live Tsetan left me, to return to Lhasa. As a Buddhist, he told me, he knew that it didn't really matter if I passed away, but he thought it would be bad for business.
   Darchen didn't look so horrible after a good night's sleep. It was still dusty, partially derelict and punctuated by heaps of rubble and refuse, but the sun shone brilliantly in a clear blue sky and the outlook across the plain to the south gave me a vision of the Himalayas, commanded by a huge, snow-capped mountain, Gurla Mandhata, with just a wisp of cloud suspended over its summit.
   The town had a couple of rudimentary general stores selli Chinese cigarettes, soap and other basic provisions, as well the usual strings of prayer flags. In front of one, men gath
in  the  afternoon for a game of pool, the battered table lo	·
supremely incongruous in the open air, while near
washed their long hair in the icy w	fa	narrow5	'"that
babbled down past my guest hou	.	archen fltl,t.Iii	ed and
unhurried_ bu , for me, it came sig·ncant	k.There
were no p1lgnms.	"''
I'd been told that at the ·	t	the i	e season, the
town was bustling wit	vis1	s. Ma	ught their own
accommodation, 		sett!			ound its edges as they set up their t s ill			otnothpleain. I'd timed my arrival for	ginni	eason, but it seemed
I was too ear lY.
   One after	on sat pon 1rin	y options over a glass of tea in Darchen's		afe. Af i little consideration, I concluded
they were severely li  rly I hadn't made much progress with my self-help pr?g e onpositive thinking.
   In my defen?  hadn't been easy with all my sleeping difficulties, b er I looked at it, I could only wait. The pilgrimage trai well-trodden, butI didn't fancy doing it alone. The ko a  s seasonal because parts of the route were liable to blocka		ow. I had no idea whether or not the snow had cleared,   I wasn't encouraged by the chunks of dirty ice that stil	to the banks of Darchen's brook. Since Tsetan had
left,l\actn'tcome across anyone in Darchen with enough English
to answer even this most basic question.
   Until, that is, I met Norbu. The cafe was small, dark and cavernous, with a long metal stove that ran down the middle. The walls and ceiling were wreathed in sheets of multi-coloured

66	HORNBILL

plastic, of the striped variety- broad blue, red and white-that is made into stout, voluminous shopping bags sold all over China, and in many other countries of Asia as well as Europe. As such, plastic must rate as oneof China's most successful exports along the Silk Road today.
   The cafe had a single window beside which I'd taken up position so that I could see the pages of my notebook. I'd also brought a novel with me to help pass the time.
   Norbu saw my book when he came in and asked with a gesture if he could sit opposite me at my rickety table. "You English?" he enquired, after he'd ordered tea. I told him I was, and we struck up a conversation.
I didn't think he was from those parts because he was weari
a windcheater and metal-rimmed spectacles of a Western tr!l>e,
He was Tibetan, he told me, but worked in Beijing at t . Academy of Social Sciences, in the I!ts·tute of Ethni   ra  re.
I assumed he was on some sort of    work.  ?
   "Yes and no," he said. "I have			do h ,, yheart jumped. Norbu had been wr· ·		em·c	s about the Kailash kora and its impo2	various  or s of Buddhist
literature for many years  1ft: e, but.h	never actually done it himself.
When the time	to  te   i  what brought me to
Darchen, his eyes lit	e coul c! am," he said excitedly. "Two academics who  ve esc  m thleibrary." Perhaps
my positive-t g strategy w"working after all.
   My initial at meNorbu, who was also staying in the guest house, was t..,.,u..,._ by the realisation that he was almost as ill-equippe  I as for the pilgrimage. He kept telling me how fat he was and  w hard it was going to be. "Very high up," he kept re g m"es,tioresome to walk." He wasn't really a pra s Buddhist, it transpired, but he had enthusias .	was, of course, Tibetan.
Altho    I'd originally envisaged making the trek in the
com		vout believers, on reflection I decided that perhaps Nor	a turn out to be the ideal companion. He suggested
we · e me yaks to carry our luggage, which I interpreted as a good ·gn, and he had no intention of prostrating himself all round the mountain. "Not possible," he cried, collapsing across the table in hysterical laughter. It wasn't his style, and anyway his tummy was too big.






SILK ROAD	67

Understanding the text	¦
I. Give reasons for the following statements.
1. The article has been titled 'Silk Road.'
2. Tibetan mastiffs were popular in China's imperial courts.
3. The author's experience at Hor was in stark contrast to earlier accounts of the place.
4. The author was disappointed with Darchen.
5. The author thought that his positive thinking strategy worked well after all.

II. Briefly comment on
1. The purpose of the author's journey to Mount Kail	'C/
2. The author's physical condition ·  Darchen.
3. The author's meeting with Nor	?	.,/
4. Tsetan's support to the au ri	thje
5. "As a Buddhist, he told ):	newtha	really matter

	forbuslness"


Discuss in gr01-y7·,,({our
1. The sensiti aviour <f')i.1)-folk.

2. !he reasons why Journeys.

undergo the travails of difficult

3. The accounts o tic laces in legends and the reality.

Th	ut language	¦
1. Noti		kind of English Tsetan uses while talking to the author. u think he picked it up?
2. 'af' dothfeollowing utterances indicate?
(i) "I told her, through Daniel ..."
(ii) "It's a cold," he said finally through Tsetan.

68	HORNBILL

3. Guess the meaning of the following words.

I  kora	drokba	kyang	
In which language are these words found?

Working with words	¦
1. The narrative has many phrases to describe the scenic beauty

of the mountainside like:

:'Se0,

2. p :g:e;::s :::eadjectiv es 1he followi :
(ii) brackish  lakes	"	.._ .,I
(iii) rickety table
(iv) hairpin bend
(vi rudimentary	es e'Q.
Noticing	¦
1. The accoun on y essive voice sentences. Locate them. In what way does f  u  of active voice contribute to the style of the narrative.
2. Notice this co tion: Tsetan was eager to have them fixed. Write five	with a similar structure.

Thin do  ¦
"Th eau ispockmarked with salt flats and brackish lakes, vest of theTethys Ocean which bordered Tibet before the continental collision that lifted it skyward."






SILK ROAD	69

Given below is an extract from an account of the Tethys Ocean downloaded from the Internet. Go online, key in Tethys Ocean in Google search and you will find exhaustive information on this geological event. You can also consult an encyclopedia.
Today, India, Indonesia and the Indian Ocean cover the area once occupied by the Tethys Ocean. Turkey, Iraq, and Tibet sit on the land once known as Cimmeria. Most of the floor of the Tethys Ocean disappeared under Cimmeria and Laurasia. We only know that Tethys existed because geologists like Suess have found fossils of ocean creatures in rocks in the Himalayas. So, we know those rocks were underwater, before the Indian continental shelf began pushing upward as it smashed into Cimmeria. We can see
similar geologic evidence in Europe, where the movement 'If'>
Africa rnised the Alps.	"CJ

Gj
v"J
,e'Q.
(c) 'Oe
o
O"
"

70	HORNBILL
---Notes---
A travelogue presenting a panoramic view of Mt Kailash.

Understanding the text	¦
• Factual comprehension
• Author's adventurous experiences while scaling the hilly terrain

Talking about the text
• Lifestyle of hill-folk
• Author's description of exotic places
Thinking about language	•	(2,
• English spoken by guides
• Communicating with strangers	? '-..
• Guessing the meanings of w&:?	othe  ,{ges  from
the context	'	-	'
Working with words	¦	V
• Noticing pictures ,v
• Use ofuncommon es

Noticing forry:'\



narration

Things to do  ¦

,c,,;,

Getting inform O:mt geological formations from the Internet/ encyclopedia	-V


"




















I do not understand this child
Though we have lived together now	,,
In the same house for years. I know	'(,/ Nothing of him, so try to build
Up a relationship from how	;,"	• He was when small. Yet h ecl
 r	,. The land is his and	one	ine?
We speak like str ,.,E'>"""'_.  here'sAgn
Of understand1	e air. r, ;('
This chil	ilt	myd l',/
Yet what es I cannotre.
Silence surroun	mld have Him prodigal, ret	ni g to
His father's e,	ehome he knew, Rather t	im make and move His world uld forgive him too, Shap om sorrow a new love.
son, we both must live
he same globe and the same land, peaks: I cannot understand
Myself, why anger grows from grief. We each put out an empty hand, Longing for something to forgive.

72	HORNBILL

Think it out	¦
1. Does the poem talk of an exclusively personal experience or is it fairly universal?
2. How is the father's helplessness brought out in the poem?
3. Identify the phrases and lines that indicate distance between father and son.
4. Does the poem have a consistent rhyme scheme?


Notes---

The poem is autobiographical in nature and describes the relatioOi between a father and his son.	'IC.7
Understanding the poem,	•
Questions are based on
• the universality of the expet' s7ribed"'
• phrases in the poem	V	... ''"V
• rhyme scheme In	e'Q'V.
(c)
'Oe
o
O"
"


